.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For layout and available macros, see man(7), man-pages(7), groff_man(7)
.\" Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Please keep this file in sync with doc/getting_started.texi
.\"
.TH HAMLIB-PRIMER "7" "2020-09-08" "Hamlib" "Hamlib Information Manual"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
hamlib-primer \- compiling and using the radio and rotator control library
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
There are several ways to obtain a working installation of Hamlib.
.
The following sections discuss installing from a package manager, building
from source, and installing Hamlib project supplied binaries on Microsoft
Windows\*R.
.
.
.SS Installing binary packages on Linux and BSD
.
The easiest way to install a released version of Hamlib on a Linux based
distribution or a BSD variant is through the provided
.IR "package manager" .
.
While package managers vary according to the distribution (it's easy to lump
BSD variants in this group too) their end goal is to provide ready to use
software packages.
.
Since such a wide variety of package managers exist, it is best to recommend
that the documentation for your chosen distribution be your guide.
.
.
.SS A variety of Hamlib sources
.
Distribution packages are most often official Hamlib releases and in some
cases could be quite old and lacking support for newer radios or rotators.
.
In some cases support is improved in existing radio or rotator back ends and
bugs are fixed in newer releases.
.
Often times to get the improved support/bug fixes, building from source will
be required.
.
Relax, it's not hard.  :-)
.
.PP
Source code is available as official releases, testing snapshots, daily
development snapshots, and the bleeding edge of development directly from the
.UR https://github.com/Hamlib/Hamlib
Git repository
.UE .
.
As a rule, even the bleeding edge tarballs should configure and compile
without error even though certain implementation work may be in progress and
may be incomplete or have errors.
.
.
.SS Getting released source
.
.
Official Hamlib source releases, commonly called
.I tarballs
can be
found on the
.UR http://sourceforge.net/projects/hamlib/files/hamlib/
SourceForge.net Hamlib files
.UE
Web page.
.
.\" It appears as of early September 2020 that the uploaded releases have been
.\" deleted from GitHub
'\" As a convenience, release archives are also mirrored at the
.\" .UR https://github.com/Hamlib/Hamlib/releases
.\" GitHub Hamlib releases
'\" .UE
.\" page.
.
The most recent release is listed first.
.
.
.SS Getting source snapshots
.
Testing release candidates (RCs) are posted during the period (often a few
weeks) before a planned release.
.
Beginning with the 4.0 release, RCs are hosted by the
.UR http://sourceforge.net/projects/hamlib/files/hamlib/
SourceForge.net Hamlib files
.UE
Web page.
.
RCs are identifed by having a
.I ~rcX
suffix where the
.I X
is replace by a numeral for successive release candidates.
.
.PP
Daily snapshots of the development repository are available via the World Wide
Web from
.UR http://n0nb.users.sourceforge.net/
Hamlib Git daily snapshots
.UE .
.
These are not official releases but are provided for testing new features and
bug fixes.
.
.PP
The daily development snapshot is made and posted each day by around 1030 UTC.
.
Daily snapshots
.I should
compile but sometimes a bug creeps in that prevents compilation.
.
If that should happen, please report it to the
.MT hamlib-developer@@lists.sourceforge.net
hamlib-developer mailing list
.ME .
.
.
.SS Git repository
.
The source repository can be
.I cloned
which copies the repository to your computer including its entire history,
branches, and release tag information.
.
In other words, once the
.BR git "(1) " clone
command is finished a complete copy of the Hamlib development will be on your
computer.
.
You can do quite a lot with this as nothing is hidden from view since the
entire history of Hamlib is right there all the way from the very first commit
to the present.
.
None of the meta-data is hidden away on some central server.
.
.PP
To clone the repository use the following command:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B git clone https://git.code.sf.net/p/hamlib/code hamlib
.EE
.in
.
.PP
or:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B git clone https://github.com/Hamlib/Hamlib.git
.EE
.in
.
.PP
.
Odds are that you will want to run the above command in a sub directory of
your home directory.
.
The
.I hamlib
directory will be created by Git and the
.I master
branch will be checked out for you as the
.IR "working copy" .
.
The master branch is one of several branches used in Hamlib development.
.
It is the main branch of new features and bug fixes.
.
The working copy will be the latest revision of every file at the time of the
clone.
.
Later updates from the developers will require using another Git command to
update your local repository.
.
.
.SS Building from source
.
Building from source will be required for various reasons.
.
Perhaps only an older release is provided by your distribution, or you would like
to test recent changes to Hamlib\(emeither a specific back end or API
changes\(emand offer a report to the developers, or you would like to take part in
development and offer your contribution to the project, or you would just like to
learn how to build a relatively comprehensive package from source.
.
Any is a good reason to build from the source code archive.
.
.PP
Before going further, this manual assumes familiarity with working from the
command prompt in a Linux/BSD/Unix like system's
.I Bourne shell
environment (compatible Bourne shells include
.BR bash (1),
.BR ksh (1),
.BR zsh (1),
and several more) either in a
.I virtual console
(a text only screen with no graphics) or in a
.I terminal
in a desktop environment
.RB ( xterm (1),
.BR rxvt (1),
.BR konsole "(1) (included with the KDE desktop),"
.BR gnome\-terminal (1),
.BR xfce4\-terminal (1),
.BR terminal "(1) (included in macOS),"
etc.).
.
If this is new to you, take some time and read up on using the shell.
.
A good tutorial can be found at
.UR http://linuxcommand.org/
LinuxCommand.org
.UE
which also offers an in-depth book that can be purchased or downloaded for no
cost (the Hamlib project is not associated with nor has any interest in the
sale of this book, it just looks like a very good effort on the part of its
author).
.
.PP
Let's get started.
.
.
.SS Compiling source tarballs
.
Before proceeding, it is essential to read the information in the files,
.IR README.md ,
.IR INSTALL ,
and
.I README.betatester
supplied in the Hamlib
.I top-level
directory which will be named
something like
.I hamlib-3.3~git
where the latter part is the release version.
.
In this case the
.I 3.3~git
indicates this is a development snapshot of the Git master branch.
.
These files provide detailed information for compiling Hamlib and will vary
some from release to release.
.
.PP
Compiling from a source tarball whether it is an official release or a testing
or daily development snapshot follows the same set of commands, known as the
.I three step
which are each run from the top-level directory:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B ./configure
.B make
.B sudo make install
.EE
.in
.
.SS configure
.
The
.IB ./ configure
command examines your system and checks it for any packages that are required
or good to have options for compiling Hamlib.
.
The leading
.I ./
tells the shell to only run the
.B configure
command found in the current directory.
.
It is always possible that a
.B configure
command could be lurking elsewhere and we don't want to run that!
.
.PP
Run:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B ./configure
.EE
.in
.
.PP
from the top-level directory.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
Some distributions are configured so commands can only be run from directories
listed in the
.B PATH
environment variable.
.
The
.I ./
is necessary or the
.B configure
command will not be run as the
.I current directory
(defined as
.IR . )
is not in the
.BR PATH .
.
This is considered a default security feature so that only programs provided
by the distribution are run.
.
.B PATH
can be modified for your own session, but that is a topic for the
LinuxCommand.org reference above.
.
.PP
Of course, things are usually complicated a bit by options and Hamlib is no
exception.
.
The good news is that the defaults, i.e., no options, work well in most
situations.
.
Options are needed to enable the compilation of certain portions of Hamlib
such as the language bindings.
.
Optional features usually require that more development tools are installed.
.
The
.I INSTALL
and
.I README.betatester
files in the Hamlib top-level directory will have details on the options
available for that release.
.
.PP
A useful option is
.B \-\-prefix
which tells
.B configure
where in the file system hierarchy Hamlib should be installed.
.
If it is not given, Hamlib will be installed in the
.I /usr/local
file system hierarchy.
.
Perhaps you want to install to your home directory instead:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B ./configure \-\-prefix=$HOME/local
.EE
.in
.
.IP
.BR Note :
For practice you may wish to start out using the
.BR \-\-prefix = \fI$HOME/local\fP
option to install the Hamlib files into your home directory and avoid
overwriting any version of Hamlib installed into the system directories.
.
The code examples in the remainder of this manual will assume Hamlib has been
installed to
.IR $HOME/local .
.
.PP
As a result of this option, all of the files will be installed in the
.I local
directory of your home directory.
.
.I local
will be created if it does not exist during installation as will several other
directories in it.
.
Installing in your home directory means that
.IR root ,
or superuser (administrator) privileges are not required when running
.BR "make install" .
.
On the other hand, some extra work will need to be done so other programs can
use the library.
.
The utilities that are compiled as a part of the Hamlib build system will work
as they are
.I linked
to the library installed under
.IR local .
.
Running them will require declaring the complete path:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B local/bin/rigctl
.EE
.in
.
.PP
or modifying your shell's
.I PATH
environment variable (see the shell tutorial site above).
.
.\" (TODO: describe library hackery in an appendix).
.
.PP
Another useful option is
.B \-\-help
which will give a few screens full of options for
.BR configure .
.
If in a desktop environment the scroll bar can be used to scroll back up
through the output.
.
In either a terminal or a virtual console Linux supports the Shift\-PageUp key
combination to scroll back up.
.
Conversely, Shift\-PageDown can be used to scroll down toward the end of the
output and the shell prompt (Shift\-UpArrow/Shift\-DownArrow may also work to
scroll one line at a time (terminal dependent)).
.
.PP
After a fair amount of time, depending on your computer, and a lot of screen
output,
.B configure
will finish its job.
.
So long as the few lines previous to the shell prompt don't say \(lqerror\(rq
or some such failure message Hamlib is ready to be compiled.
.
If there is an error and all of the required packages listed in
.I README.betatester
have been installed, please ask for help on the
.MT hamlib\-developer@lists.sourceforge.net
hamlib-developer mailing list
.ME .
.
.
.SS make
.
The
.BR make (1)
command is responsible for running the
.I compiler
which reads the source files and from the instructions it finds in them writes
.I object
files which are the binary instructions the CPU of a computer can execute.
.
.B make
then calls the
.I linker
which puts the object files together in the correct order to create the Hamlib
library files and its executable programs.
.
.PP
Run:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B make
.EE
.in
.
.PP
from the top-level directory.
.
.PP
Any error that causes
.B make
to stop early is cause for a question to the
.MT hamlib\-developer@lists.sourceforge.net
hamlib-developer mailing list
.ME .
.
.PP
In general
.B make
will take longer than
.B configure
to complete its run.
.
As it is a system command, and therefore found in the shell's
.B PATH
environment variable, prefixing
.B make
with
.I ./
will cause a \(lqcommand not found\(rq error from the shell.
.
.
.SS make install
.
Assuming that you have not set the installation prefix to your home directory,
root (administrator) privileges will be required to install Hamlib to the
system directories.
.
Two popular methods exist for gaining root privileges,
.BR su (1)
and
.BR sudo (8).
.
.B sudo
is probably the most popular these days, particularly when using the
.UR http://www.ubuntu.com
Ubuntu
.UE
family of distributions.
.
.PP
Run:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B sudo make install
.EE
.in
.
.PP
or:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " su -l"
Password:
.RB # " make install"
.EE
.in
.
.PP
as root from the top-level directory.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
The shell session is shown to show the change in prompt from a normal user
account to the root account.
.
.PP
The
.B \-l
option to
.B su
forces a
.I login
shell so that environment variables such as
.I PATH
are set correctly.
.
.PP
Running
.B make install
will call the installer to put all of the newly compiled files and other files
(such as this document) in predetermined places set by the
.B \-\-prefix
option to
.B configure
in the directory hierarchy (yes, this is by design and
.B make
is not just flinging files any old place!).
.
.PP
A lot of screen output will be generated.
.
Any errors will probably be rather early in the process and will likely be
related to your
.I username
not having write permissions in the system directory structure.
.
.
.SS ldconfig
.
Once the installation is complete one more step is required if Hamlib has
never been installed from a local build before.
.
The
.B ldconfig
command tells the system library loader where to find the newly installed
Hamlib libraries.
.
It too will need to be run with root privileges:
.
.PP
Run:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B sudo ldconfig
.EE
.in
.
.PP
as root from any directory or while logged in as root from above.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
Subsequent installations of Hamlib will not need to have
.B ldconfig
run after each installation if a newer version of Hamlib was not installed,
i.e., when recompiling the same version during development.
.
.PP
On some distributions a bit of configuration will be needed before
.B ldconfig
will add locally compiled software to its database.
.
Please consult your distribution's documentation.
.
.
.SS Bootstrapping from a \(aqgit clone\(aq
.
Choosing to build from from a
.B git clone
requires a few more development tools (notice a theme here?) as detailed in
.IR README.developer .
.
The most critical will be the GNU Autotools
.RB ( autoconf ,
.BR automake ,
.BR libtool ,
and more) from which the build system consisting of
.BR configure ,
the various
.IR Makefile.in s
throughout the directory structure, and the final
.IR Makefile s
are generated.
.
.PP
In the top-level directory is the
.B bootstrap
script from which the build system is
.IR bootsrapped\(emthe
process of generating the Hamlib build system from
.I configure.ac
and the various
.IR Makefile.am s.
.
At its completion the
.B configure
script will be present to configure the build system.
.
.PP
Next
.B configure
is run with any needed build options
.RB ( "configure \-\-help"
is useful) to enable certain features or provide paths for locating needed
build dependencies, etc.
.
Environment variables intended for the preprocessor and/or compiler may also
be set on the
.B configure
command line.
.
.PP
After the configuration is complete, the build may proceed with the
.B make
step as for the source tarballs above.
.
Or
.B configure \-\-help
may be run, and
.B configure
run again with specific options in which case the
.IR Makefile s
will be regenerated and the build can proceed with the new configuration.
.
.
.SS Other make targets
.
Besides
.BR "make install" ,
other
.I targets
exist when running
.BR make .
.
Running
.B make clean
from the top-level directory removes all of the generated object and
executable files generated by running
.B make
freeing up considerable disk space.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
During development of individual source files, it is not necessary to
run
.B make clean
each time before
.BR make .
.
Simply run
.B make
and only the modified file(s) and any objects that depend on them will be
recompiled.
.
This speeds up development time considerably.
.
.PP
To remove even the generated
.IR Makefile s,
run
.B make distclean
from the top-level directory.
.
After this target is run,
.B configure
will need to be run again to regenerate the
.IR Makefile s.
.
This command may not be as useful as the
.IR Makefile s
do not take up much space, however it can be useful for rebuilding the
.IR Makefile s
when modifying a
.I Makefile.am
or
.I configure.ac
during build system development.
.
.
.SS Parallel build trees
.
One feature of the GNU build system used by Hamlib is that the object files
can be kept in a directory structure separate from the source files.
.
While this has no effect on the
.B make
targets described above, it does help the developer find files in the source
tree!
.
One such way of using parallel builds is described in
.IR README.developer .
.
.PP
Parallel builds can be very useful as one build directory can be configured
for a release and another build directory can be configured for debugging with
different options passed to
.B configure
from each directory.
.
The generated
.IR Makefile s
are unique to each build directory and will not interfere with each other.
.
.
.SS Adding debugging symbols
.
When additional debugging symbols are needed with, for example, the GNU
Debugger,
.BR gdb ,
the needed compiler and linker options are passed as environment variables.
.
.PP
Run:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B ../hamlib/configure CFLAGS="-ggdb3 -O0" CXXFLAGS="-ggdb3 -O0"
.EE
.in
.
.PP
from a sibling build directory intended for a debugging build.
.
.PP
The
.B \-ggdb3
option tells the C compiler, in this case the GNU C Compiler,
.BR gcc ,
to add special symbols useful for GDB, the GNU debugger.
.
The
.B -O0
option tells
.B gcc
to turn off all optimizations which will make it easier to follow some
variables that might otherwise be optimized away.
.
.B CFLAGS
and
.B CXXFLAGS
may be set independently for each compiler.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
There are a number compiler options available for controlling debugging
symbols and setting optimization levels.
.
Please consult the compiler's manual for all the details.
.
.
.SS Compiling for Microsoft Windows
.
Currently compiling is done on a Debian 10 (Buster) virtual machine using
.UR http://www.mingw.org
MinGW
.UE .
.I README.build-win32
in the
.I scripts
directory has details on how this is accomplished.
.
.
.SS Pre-compiled binaries for Microsoft Windows
.
Pre-compiled binaries for Microsoft Windows 32 and 64 bit architectures
(Windows NT and newer) are available for both official releases and daily
development snapshots.
.
.PP
Official releases are available through the
.UR http://sourceforge.net/projects/hamlib/files/hamlib/
SourceForge.net file download service
.UE .
.
.\"As an alternative, official releases are also available though the
.\".UR https://github.com/Hamlib/Hamlib/releases
.\"Hamlib archive at GitHub
.\".UE .
.
.PP
Daily development snapshots are available from the
.UR http://n0nb.users.sourceforge.net/
daily snapshots page
.UE .
.
.PP
Beginning with the Hamlib 1.2.15.3 release a self-extracting installer is
available.
.
Among its features are selecting which portions of Hamlib are installed.
.
The
.I PATH
environment variable will need to be set manually per the included
.I README.w32-bin
or
.I README.w64-bin
file.
.
.PP
Daily development snapshots feature both a .ZIP archive and the self
extracting installer.
.
.PP
Bug reports and questions about these archives should be sent to the
.MT hamlib-developer@lists.sourceforge.net
hamlib-developer mailing list
.ME .
.
.
.SH COPYING
.
This file is part of Hamlib, a project to develop a library that simplifies
radio and rotator control functions for developers of software primarily of
interest to radio amateurs and those interested in radio communications.
.
.PP
Copyright \(co 2001-2020 Hamlib Group (various contributors)
.
.PP
This is free software; see the file COPYING for copying conditions.  There is
NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR git (1),
.BR hamlib (7),
.BR ldconfig (8),
.BR make (1),
.BR su (1),
.BR sudo (8)
.
.
.SH COLOPHON
.
Links to the Hamlib Wiki, Git repository, release archives, and daily snapshot
archives are available via
.
.UR http://www.hamlib.org
hamlib.org
.UE .
