.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For layout and available macros, see man(7), man-pages(7), groff_man(7)
.\" Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Please keep this file in sync with doc/utility-programs.texi
.\"
.TH HAMLIB-UTILITIES "7" "2020-09-08" "Hamlib" "Hamlib Information Manual"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
hamlib-utilties \- radio and rotator control utilities of Hamlib
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
Included with the Hamlib distribution are several utility programs.
.
Besides providing a way for developers to test new code and bug fixes, the
programs also offer a reference implementation for interfacing to the Hamlib
library functions both through the
.B C
.SM API
(Application Programming Interface) and offering a network accessible
.SM API.
.
.PP
This page summarizes the three test programs,
.BR ampctl (1)
for testing amplifier back ends,
.BR rigctl (1)
for testing radio back ends, and
.BR rotctl (1)
for testing rotator back ends and the three network daemons,
.BR ampctld (1),
.BR rigctld (1),
and
.BR rotcltd (1)
for amplifier, radio, and rotator access via network sockets.
.
Also included are three demonstration utilities,
.BR rigmem (1),
.BR rigsmtr (1),
and
.BR rigswr (1)
which provide functional examples of how Hamlib may be used to accomplish
various tasks.
.
.
.SH rigctl
.
.BR rigctl (1)
is the most frequently used Hamlib utility.
.
As the other
.I ctl
utilities share many of the same characteristics, much of the introductory
information presented in this section is applicable to the other utility
programs.
.
.
.SS Introduction to rigctl
.
Most likely the first of the Hamlib utility programs that is used is
.BR rigctl (1).
.
rigctl is a character based interactive program and a command line program
able to set or query a radio's value with a single command.
.
rigctl is invoked from a shell command prompt with various options and
additional commands.
.
.PP
In its most simple use as a
.I command line
program, rigctl is used to set frequency and mode by typing commands after any
rigctl options:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rigctl F 14205000
.B rigctl M USB 2400
.EE
.in
.
.PP
and then query those values:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rigctl f
.B rigctl m
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Entering
.I interactive mode
is a simple matter of not placing any commands after any rigctl options:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rigctl
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Entering interactive mode allows successive commands to be entered without
exiting rigctl.
.
Recent additions to rigctl allow command editing and history recall through
use of the
.UR https://tiswww.case.edu/php/chet/readline/rltop.html
Readline
.UE
library.
.
.PP
Interactive mode is indicated by the spartan prompt:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
Rig command:
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Commands are given at the prompt and follow the general rule that upper case
letters set a value and lower case letters query a value:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB "Rig command: " M
.RB "Mode: " USB
.RB "Passband: " 2500

.RB "Rig command: " m
Mode: USB
Passband: 2500

Rig command:
.EE
.in
.
.PP
An additional prompt is printed when more information is required by the
command.
.
For \f(CWM\fP above, rigctl prompted for the \f(CWMode\fP and \f(CWPassband\fP
values.
.
For \f(CWm\fP above, rigctl returned the \f(CWMode\fP and \f(CWPassband\fP
values without further prompts.
.
The command prompt is returned after each command invocation.
.
.PP
The above examples invoked rigctl without specifying a radio model.
.
This is a feature where the Hamlib internal radio model 1
.I dummy
is used.
.
The dummy radio provides a way to test Hamlib functions without the need for
actual radio hardware.
.
However, to develop the Hamlib backend capability for a given radio, having
the actual radio connected to the computer is necessary for debugging.
.
.PP
For example, to quickly set frequency on an Elecraft K3:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rigctl -m 2029 -r /dev/rig F 3900000
.EE
.in
.
.PP
and to query the frequency and then mode:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rigctl -m 2029 -r /dev/rig f
3900000

.B rigctl -m 2029 -r /dev/rig m
LSB
2000
.EE
.in
.
.IP
.BR Note :
the returned values do not have the prompt strings associated with interactive
mode as shown above.
.
.PP
The
.B \-m
option takes a numeric value that corresponds to a given radio back end model.
.
The
.B \-r
option takes the path to the port device on
.SM POSIX
and the device name on Microsoft Windows.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
A complete list of supported radio models may be seen by use of the
.B -l
option:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rigctl -l
 Rig #  Mfg              Model         Version    Status
     1  Hamlib           Dummy         0.5        Beta
     2  Hamlib           NET rigctl    0.3        Beta
  1001  Yaesu            FT-847        0.5        Beta
  1003  Yaesu            FT-1000D      0.0.6      Alpha
\&.
\&.
\&.
 27002  Rohde&Schwarz    EB200         0.1        Untested
 28001  Philips/Simoco   PRM8060       0.1        Alpha
 29001  ADAT www.adat.ch ADT-200A      1.36       Beta
.EE
.in
.
.PP
The list is long so use \f(CWShift\-PageUp\fP/\f(CWShift\-PageDown\fP on
Linux, \f(CWScrollLock\fP then \f(CWPageUp\fP/\f(CWPageDown\fP on Free BSD, or
use the scrollbar to the virtual terminal window
.RB ( cmd
window on Microsoft Windows) or the output can be piped to
.BR more (1)
or
.BR less (1),
e.g., \(lq\f(CWrigctl -l | more\fP\(rq to scroll back up the list.
.
The list is sorted numerically by model number since Hamlib 1.2.15.1.
.
Model numbers of a manufacturer/protocol family are grouped together.
.
.
.SS rigctl reference
.
The complete reference for rigctl can be found in the
.BR rigctl (1)
manual page.
.
.
.SH rotctl
.
Identical in function to
.BR rigctl (1),
.BR rotctl (1)
provides a means for testing Hamlib functions useful for rotator control and
QTH (Maidenhead gridsquare system, see
.UR https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maidenhead_Locator_System
Maidenhead Locator System
.UE )
locator computations.
.
As rotators have a much narrower scope than radios, there are fewer command
line options and commands for rotctl.
.
.
.SS Introduction to rotctl
.
.BR rotctl (1)
is a character based interactive program and a command line program able to
set or query a rotator's value with a single command.
.
rotctl is invoked from a shell command prompt with various options and
additional commands.
.
.PP
In its most simple use as a
.I command line
program, rotctl is used to set azimuth position and (optionally) elevation by
typing commands after any rotctl options:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rotctl P 145.0 23.0
.B rotctl M 8 25
.EE
.in
.
.PP
and then query those values:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rotctl p
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Entering
.I interactive mode
is a simple matter of not placing any commands after any rotctl options:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rotctl
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Entering interactive mode allows successive commands to be entered without
exiting rotctl.
.
Interactive mode allows for command editing and history recall through the use
of the
.UR https://tiswww.case.edu/php/chet/readline/rltop.html
Readline
.UE
library.
.
.PP
Interactive mode is indicated by the spartan prompt:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
Rotator command:
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Commands are given at the prompt:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB "Rotator command: " M
.RB "Direction: " 16
.RB "Speed: " 60

.RB "Rotator command: " p
Azimuth: 11.352000
Elevation: 0.000000

.RB "Rotator command: " p
Azimuth: 27.594000
Elevation: 0.000000

Rotator command:
.EE
.in
.
.PP
An additional prompt is printed when more information is required by the
command.
.
For \f(CWM\fP above, rotctl prompted for the \f(CWDirection\fP and
\f(CWSpeed\fP values.
.
For \f(CWp\fP above, rotctl returned the \f(CWAzimuth\fP and \f(CWElevation\fP
values without further prompts.
.
The command prompt is returned after each command invocation.
.
.PP
The above examples invoked rotctl without specifying a rotator model.
.
This is a feature where the Hamlib internal rotator model 1
.I dummy
is used instead.
.
The dummy rotator provides a way to test Hamlib functions without the need for
actual rotator hardware.
.
However, to develop back end capability for a given rotator, having the actual
controller connected to the computer is necessary for debugging.
.
.PP
For example, to quickly set position for RotorEZ:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rotctl -m 401 -r /dev/rotor P 100.0 0.0
.EE
.in
.
.PP
and to query the position:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rotctl -m 401 -r /dev/rotor p
100.000000
0.000000
.EE
.in
.
.PP
The returned values do not have the prompt strings associated with interactive
mode as shown above.
.
.PP
The
.B -m
option takes a numeric value that corresponds to a given rotator back end model.
.
The
.B -r
option takes the path to the port device on
.SM POSIX
or the device name on Microsoft Windows.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
A complete list of supported rotator models may be seen by use of the
.B -l
option:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B rotctl -l
 Rot #  Mfg              Model         Version    Status
     1  Hamlib           Dummy         0.5        Beta
     2  Hamlib           NET rotctl    0.3        Beta
   201  Hamlib           EasycommI     0.3        Beta
   202  Hamlib           EasycommII    0.3        Beta
\&.
\&.
\&.
  1201  AMSAT            IF-100        0.1        Untested
  1301  LA7LKA           ts7400        0.1        Beta
  1401  Celestron        NexStar       0.1        Untested
.EE
.in
.
.PP
The list is long so use \f(CWShift\-PageUp\fP/\f(CWShift\-PageDown\fP on
Linux, \f(CWScrollLock\fP then \f(CWPageUp\fP/\f(CWPageDown\fP on Free BSD, or
use the scrollbar to the virtual terminal window
.RB ( cmd
window on Microsoft Windows) or the output can be piped to
.BR more (1)
or
.BR less (1),
e.g. \(lq\f(CWrotctl -l | more\fP\(rq to scroll back up the list.
.
The list is sorted numerically by model number since Hamlib 1.2.15.1.
.
Model numbers of a manufacturer/protocol family are grouped together.
.
.
.SS rotctl reference
.
The complete reference for rotctl can be found in the
.BR rotctl (1)
manual page.
.
.
.SH ampctl
.
The
.BR ampctl (1)
utility is a recent addition to the Hamlib utilities as a part of the 4.0
development cycle.
.
It is intended to test the Hamlib implementation of amplifier control and is
similar in function to the utilities previously described.
.
See the
.BR ampctl (1)
manual page for the complete reference.
.
.
.SH rigctld
.
The
.BR rigctld (1)
program is a network server that accepts the familiar commands of
.BR rigctl (1)
and provides the response data over a
.SM TCP/IP
network socket to an application.
.
In this manner an application can access a rigctld instance from nearly
anywhere (caveat, no security is currently provided by rigctld).
.
Applications using rigctld do not link directly to Hamlib nor use its C API.
.
.
.SS Introduction to rigctld
.
.BR rigctld (1)
communicates to a client through a
.SM TCP
network socket using text commands shared with
.BR rigctl (1).
.
The protocol is simple; commands are sent to rigctld on one line and rigctld
responds to
.B get
commands with the requested values, one per line, when successful, otherwise,
it responds with one line
.B RPRT
.IR x ,
where
.I x
is a negative number indicating the Hamlib error code.
.
Commands that do not return values respond with the line
.B RPRT
.IR x ,
where
.I x
is zero when successful, otherwise a negative number indicating the Hamlib
error code.
.
Each line is terminated with a newline,
.IR \en ,
character.
.
This protocol is primarily for use by the
.B NET rigctl
(radio model 2) backend.
.
.PP
A separate Extended Response protocol extends the above behavior by echoing
the received command string as a header, any returned values as a key: value
pair, and the
.B RPRT
.I x
string as the end of response marker which includes the Hamlib success or
failure value.
.
Consider using this protocol for clients that will interact with
rigctld directly through a TCP network socket.
.
.PP
Multiple radios can be controlled on different TCP ports by use of multiple
rigctld processes each listening on a unique TCP port.
.
It is hoped that rigctld will be especially useful for client authors using
languages such as
.UR http://www.perl.org/
Perl
.UE ,
.UR http://www.python.org/
Python
.UE ,
.UR http://php.net/
PHP
.UE ,
.UR http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/
Ruby
.UE ,
.UR http://www.tcl.tk/
TCL
.UE ,
and others.
.
.
.SS rigctld reference
.
The complete reference for rigctld can be found in the
.BR rigctld (1)
manual page.
.
.
.SH rotctld
.
The
.BR rotctld (1)
program is a network server that accepts the familiar commands of
.BR rotctl (1)
and provides the response data over a \f(CWTCP/IP\fP network socket to an
application.
.
In this manner an application can access a rotctld instance from nearly
anywhere (caveat, no security is currently provided by rotctld).
.
Applications using rotctld do not link directly to Hamlib nor use its C API.
.
.
.SS Introduction to rotctld
.
.BR rotctld (1)
communicates to a client through a
.SM TCP
network socket using text commands shared with
.BR rotctl (1).
.
The protocol is simple, commands are sent to rotctld on one line and
rotctld responds to
.B get
commands with the requested values, one per line, when successful, otherwise,
it responds with one line
.B RPRT
.IR x ,
where
.I x
is a negative number indicating the Hamlib error code.
.
Commands that do not return values respond with the line
.B RPRT
.IR x ,
where
.I x
is zero when successful, otherwise a negative number indicating
the Hamlib error code.
.
Each line is terminated with a newline,
.I \en
character.
.
This protocol is primarily for use by the
.B NET rotctl
(rotator model 2) backend.
.
.PP
A separate Extended Response protocol extends the above behavior by echoing
the received command string as a header, any returned values as a key: value
pair, and the
.B RPRT
.I x
string as the end of response marker which includes the Hamlib success or
failure value.
.
Consider using this protocol for clients that will interact with
rotctld directly through a TCP network socket.
.
.PP
Multiple rotators can be controlled on different TCP ports by use of multiple
rotctld processes each listening on a unique TCP port.
.
It is hoped that rotctld will be especially useful for client authors using
languages such as
.UR http://www.perl.org/
Perl
.UE ,
.UR http://www.python.org/
Python
.UE ,
.UR http://php.net/
PHP
.UE ,
.UR http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/
Ruby
.UE ,
.UR http://www.tcl.tk/
TCL
.UE ,
and others.
.
.
.SS rotctld reference
.
The complete reference for rotctld can be found in the
.BR rotctld (1)
manual page.
.
.
.SH ampctl
.
The
.BR ampctld (1)
utility is a recent addition to the Hamlib utilities as a part of the 4.0
development cycle.
.
It provides network socket access for the Hamlib implementation of amplifier
control and is similar in function to the network utilities previously
described.
.
See the
.BR ampctld (1)
manual page for the complete reference.
.
.
.SH rigmem
.
.B rigmem
may be used to backup and restore memory of radio transceivers and receivers.
.
.
.SS Introduction to rigmem
.
Backup and restore memory of radio transceivers and receivers.
.B rigmem
accepts
.IR command s
from the command line only.
.
.
.SS rigmem reference
.
The complete reference for rigmem can be found in the
.BR rigmem (1)
manual page.
.
.
.SH rigsmtr
.
.B rigsmtr
uses
.B Hamlib
to control a radio to measure S-Meter value versus antenna azimuth.
.
.
.SS Introduction to rigsmtr
.
rigsmtr rotates the antenna from minimum azimuth to maximum azimuth.
Every second, or
.I time_step
if specified in seconds, it retrieves the signal strength. Azimuth in degrees
and the corresponding S-Meter level in dB relative to S9 are then printed on
.BR stdout .
.
.PP
To work correctly, rigsmtr needs a radio that could measure S-Meter and a Hamlib
backend that is able to retrieve it, connected to a Hamlib supported rotator.
.
.
.SS rigsmtr reference
.
The complete reference for rigsmtr can be found in the
.BR rigsmtr (1)
manual page.
.
.
.SH rigswr
.
.B rigswr
may be used to measure VSWR vs frequency.
.
.
.SS Introduction to rigswr
.
rigswr uses Hamlib to control a radio to measure VSWR (Voltage Standing
Wave Ratio) over a frequency range.

It scans frequencies from
.I start_freq
to
.I stop_freq
with an optional increment of
.I freq_step
(default step is 100 kHz).
.
All values must be entered as an integer in Hertz (cycles per second).

.BR Note :
rigswr assumes that
.I start_freq is less than or equal to
.IR stop_freq .
.
If it is greater, rigswr will exit without doing anything.
.
.PP
For each frequency, rigswr transmits at 25% of total POWER during 0.5 second
in CW mode and reads VSWR.
.
.PP
Frequency and the corresponding VSWR are then printed on stdout.
.
.PP
To work correctly, rigswr needs a radio that can measure VSWR and a
Hamlib backend that supports reading VSWR from the radio.
.
.
.SS rigswr reference
.
The complete reference for rigswr can be found in the
.BR rigswr (1)
manual page.
.
.
.SH COPYING
.
This file is part of Hamlib, a project to develop a library that simplifies
radio and rotator control functions for developers of software primarily of
interest to radio amateurs and those interested in radio communications.
.
.PP
Copyright \(co 2001-2020 Hamlib Group (various contributors)
.
.PP
This is free software; see the file COPYING for copying conditions.  There is
NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR less (1),
.BR more (1),
.BR ampctl (1),
.BR ampctld (1),
.BR rigctl (1),
.BR rigctld (1),
.BR rotctl (1),
.BR rotctld (1),
.BR rigmem (1),
.BR rigsmtr (1),
.BR rigswr (1),
.BR hamlib (7),
.BR hamlib-primer (7)
.
.
.SH COLOPHON
.
Links to the Hamlib Wiki, Git repository, release archives, and daily snapshot
archives are available via
.
.UR http://www.hamlib.org
hamlib.org
.UE .
