\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename hamlib.info
@include version.texi
@documentencoding UTF-8
@settitle Ham Radio Control Libraries @value{VERSION}
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for the Ham Radio Control Libraries (version @value{VERSION}
updated @value{UPDATED}), which is a development effort to provide a
consistent programming interface for programmers wanting to incorporate
radio and rotor control into their programs.

Copyright @copyright{} 2013,2018 Nate Bargmann

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later
version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Software libraries
@direntry
* Hamlib: (hamlib).             Ham Radio Control Libraries.
@end direntry

@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@title Ham Radio Control Libraries
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@author Nate Bargmann, N0NB (@email{n0nb@@n0nb.us})
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Ham Radio Control Libraries

This manual is for Ham Radio Control Libraries (Hamlib) (version @value{VERSION},
@value{UPDATED}).

@menu
* Copying and Redistribution::
* Hamlib in a Nutshell::
* Getting started::
* Utility programs::
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Working with Git::
* List of Figures::
* Concept Index::
@end menu


@node Copying and Redistribution
@unnumbered Copying and Redistribution
@cindex Copying, redistribution
@cindex Redistribution, copying
@cindex Copyleft

This manual documents Hamlib, a programming library and various supplied
programs, which is
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_Software_Definition, Free
Software, Free Software}.  Besides often being distributed at no cost to
you, Free in this context means that the copyright holders to Hamlib
have agreed to offer their collective work under terms that give you
certain rights that allow you to modify and/or redistribute Hamlib under
the same terms that you received it from them.

Such licensing is often termed
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft, copyleft, copyleft} as a
play against the common ``all rights reserved'' terms of normal
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyright, copyright, copyright}.  In
general, copyleft provides everyone with a license to modify and
distribute the modified work or to simply distribute a copyrighted work
under certain terms.  Hamlib source code is copyrighted by its authors
and is licensed by them under two common licenses---the
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Lesser_General_Public_License, GNU
Lesser General Public License, GNU Lesser General Public License}
@acronym{LGPL} for the ``front end'' and ``back end'' library source
code files, and the
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_General_Public_License, GNU
General Public License, GNU General Public License} @acronym{GPL} for
the supplied programs source code files.  The full text of the LGPL and
the GPL can be found in the files COPYING.LIB and COPYING in the root
directory of the Hamlib source archive.

This manual is covered by the
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Free_Documentation_License, GNU
Free Documentation License, GNU Free Documentation License}
@acronym{GFDL} with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no
Back-Cover Texts.  Source code examples in this manual are parallel
licensed under the GPL unless otherwise noted.

As part of the Copyleft nature of the licenses, the authors of Hamlib
must forbid you from distributing Hamlib under terms that forbid others
from exercising the same rights you received.  You must give anyone you
distribute Hamlib to the same rights to obtain, modify, and distribute
the Hamlib source code that you received nor may you license Hamlib
under other terms than those you received.  Any recipients of Hamlib
must be informed of the rights to the source code that they have
received.

@cindex NO WARRANTY
Finally, the authors of Hamlib require that it be understood that NO
WARRANTY of any kind is offered to anyone receiving the Hamlib source
code distribution.  Anyone distributing modified versions of Hamlib has
the responsibility to inform any recipients that what they have is not
the official release of Hamlib by its authors and should be prepared to
support the modified version(s).  This is to preserve the reputations of
the Hamlib authors and the Hamlib Project.  While it is not a
requirement of the licenses, it is courteous to offer modifications back
to the Hamlib authors for possible incorporation into their official
release(s).
@end ifnottex


@c ------------ Chapter ------------
@node Hamlib in a Nutshell
@chapter Hamlib in a Nutshell
@cindex Nutshell

@include nutshell.texi

@c ------------ Chapter ------------
@node Getting started
@chapter Getting started

@include getting_started.texi

@c ------------ Chapter ------------
@node Utility programs
@chapter Utility programs reference

@include utility_programs.texi

@c ----------------- Appendixes start here ------------------


@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi


@node Working with Git
@appendix Working with Git

Git offers a myriad of commands and options.  Fortunately, only a few
are needed for Hamlib development.


@node List of Figures
@unnumbered List of Figures
@listoffloats Figure


@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@bye
