Included with the Hamlib distribution are several utility programs.
Besides providing a way for developers to test new code and bug fixes,
the programs also offer a reference implementation for interfacing to
the Hamlib library functions both through the C API and offering a
network accessible API.

This chapter focuses on the two test programs, @command{rigctl} for
testing radio back ends and @command{rotctl} for testing rotor back
ends and the two network daemons, @command{rigctld} and
@command{rotcltd} for radio and rotor access via network sockets.


@menu
* rigctl::
* rotctl::
* rigctld::
* rotctld::
@end menu

@node rigctl
@section @command{rigctl}
@cindex rigctl

@command{rigctl} is the most frequently used Hamlib utility.  As the
other utilities share many of the same characteristics, much of the
introductory information presented in this section is applicable to
the other utility programs.

@menu
* Introduction to rigctl::
* rigctl invocation::
* rigctl command line options::
* rigctl commands::
* rigctl readline support::
@end menu

@node Introduction to rigctl
@subsection Introduction to @command{rigctl}
@cindex Introduction to @command{rigctl}
@cindex @command{rigctl}, introduction to

Most likely the first of the Hamlib utility programs that is used is
@command{rigctl}.  @command{rigctl} is a character based interactive
program and a command line program able to set or query a radio's
value with a single command.  @command{rigctl} is invoked from a shell
command prompt with various options and additional commands.

In its most simple use as a @dfn{command line} program,
@command{rigctl} is used to set frequency and mode by typing commands
after any @command{rigctl} options:

@example
@kbd{rigctl F 14205000}
@kbd{rigctl M USB 2400}
@end example

@noindent
and then query those values:

@example
@kbd{rigctl f}
@kbd{rigctl m}
@end example

Entering interactive mode is a simple matter of not placing any
commands after any @command{rigctl} options:

@example
@kbd{rigctl}
@end example

@noindent
Entering @dfn{interactive mode} allows successive commands to be
entered without exiting @command{rigctl}.  Recent additions to
@command{rigctl} allow command editing and history recall through use
of the @url{ http://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/rltop.html,
Readline} library.

Interactive mode is indicated by the spartan prompt:

@example
Rig command:
@end example

@noindent
Commands are given at the prompt and follow the general rule that
upper case letters set a value and lower case letters query a value:

@example
Rig command: @kbd{M}
Mode: @kbd{USB}
Passband: @kbd{2500}

Rig command: @kbd{m}
Mode: USB
Passband: 2500

Rig command:
@end example

An additional prompt is printed when more information is required by
the command.  For @kbd{M} above, @command{rigctl} prompted for the
``Mode'' and ``Passband'' values.  For @kbd{m} above, @command{rigctl}
returned the ``Mode'' and ``Passband'' values without further prompts.
The command prompt is returned after each command invocation.

The above examples invoked @command{rigctl} without specifying a radio
model.  This is a feature where the Hamlib internal radio @dfn{dummy} is
used instead.  The dummy radio provides a way to test Hamlib functions
with out the need for actual radio hardware.  However, to develop back
end capability for a given radio, having the actual radio connected to
the computer is necessary for debugging.

For example, to quickly set frequency on an Elecraft K3:

@example
@kbd{rigctl -m 229 -r /dev/rig F 3900000}
@end example

@noindent
and to query the frequency and then mode:

@example
@kbd{rigctl -m 229 -r /dev/rig f}
3900000

@kbd{rigctl -m 229 -r /dev/rig m}
LSB
2000
@end example

@noindent
The returned values do not have the prompt strings associated with
interactive mode as shown above.

The @option{-m} option takes a numeric value that corresponds to a
given radio back end model.  The @option{-r} option takes the path to
the port device on @acronym{POSIX} and the device name on MS Windows.

@quotation Note
A complete list of supported radio models may be seen by use of the
@option{-l} option:

@example
@kbd{rigctl -l}
 Rig #  Mfg              Model         Version    Status
     1  Hamlib           Dummy         0.5        Beta
     2  Hamlib           NET rigctl    0.3        Beta
   101  Yaesu            FT-847        0.5        Beta
   103  Yaesu            FT-1000D      0.0.6      Alpha
.
.
.
  2702  Rohde&Schwarz    EB200         0.1        Untested
  2801  Philips/Simoco   PRM8060       0.1        Alpha
  2901  ADAT www.adat.ch ADT-200A      1.36       Beta
@end example

@noindent
The list is long so use @kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageUp}/
@kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageDown} on Linux, @kbd{@key{ScrollLock}} then
@kbd{@key{PageUp}}/@kbd{@key{PageDown}} on Free BSD, or use the
scrollbar to the virtual terminal window (@command{cmd} window on MS
Windows) or the output can be piped to '@command{more}' or
'@command{less}', e.g.@: '@kbd{rigctl -l | more}' to scroll back up
the list.  The list is sorted numerically by model number since Hamlib
1.2.15.1.  Model numbers of a manufacturer/ protocol family are
grouped together.
@end quotation

@node rigctl invocation
@subsection @command{rigctl} invocation
@cindex @command{rigctl} invocation
@cindex invocation, @command{rigctl}

Here are some additional examples for invoking @command{rigctl} for
various situations.

@noindent
Start @command{rigctl} for a Yaesu FT-920 using a @acronym{USB} to serial
adapter on Linux in interactive mode:

@example
rigctl -m 114 -r /dev/ttyUSB1
@end example

@noindent
Start @command{rigctl} for a Yaesu FT-920 using @file{COM1} on MS
Windows while generating TRACE output to @file{stderr}:

@example
rigctl -m 114 -r COM1 -vvvvv
@end example

@noindent
Start @command{rigctl} for a Yaesu FT-920 using a @acronym{USB} to
serial adapter on Linux while setting baud rate and stop bits:

@example
rigctl -m 114 -r /dev/ttyUSB1 -s 4800 -C stop_bits=2
@end example

@noindent
Start @command{rigctl} for an Elecraft K3 using a @acronym{USB} to
serial adapter on Linux while specifying a command terminator for the
@command{w} command:

@example
rigctl -m 229 -r /dev/ttyUSB0 -t';'
@end example

@noindent
Connect to a running @command{rigctld} with radio model 2 (@code{NET
rigctl}) on the local host and specifying the @acronym{TCP} port,
setting frequency and mode:

@example
rigctl -m 2 -r localhost:4532 F 7253500 M LSB 0
@end example

@strong{N.B.} On MS Windows @kbd{localhost} may need to be replaced
with the actual loopback @acronym{IP} address--@kbd{127.0.0.1}--or the
address passed to @command{rigctld} with the @option{-T} option.

@node rigctl command line options
@subsection @command{rigctl} command line options
@cindex @command{rigctl} command line options
@cindex Command line options, @command{rigctl}

The @command{rigctl} command line options (not to be confused with
@command{rigctl} commands) control the action of various features.
Options consist of both ``short options''--a single hyphen '@kbd{-}'
followed by a single letter and ``long options''--two hyphens
'@kbd{--}' followed by several letters often comprising one or more
words separated by a hyphen.

@command{rigctl} accepts the following options:

@table @option
@item -m
@itemx --model=@var{id}
Select radio model number. See model list (use @kbd{rigctl -l}).

@strong{N.B.} @command{rigctl} (or third party software) will use rig
model 2 for NET rigctl (@command{rigctld}).

@item -r
@itemx --rig-file=@var{device}
Use @var{device} as the file name of the port the radio is connected.
Often a serial port, but could be a USB to serial adapter.  Typically
@file{/dev/ttyS0} , @file{/dev/ttyS1} , @file{/dev/ttyUSB0} , etc.@:
on Linux or @file{COM1} , @file{COM2} , etc.@: on MS Windows.  The
special string @kbd{uh-rig} may be given to enable micro-ham device
support.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -p
@itemx --ptt-file=@var{device}
Use @var{device} as the file name of the Push-To-Talk device using a
device file as described above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -d
@itemx --dcd-file=@var{device}
Use @var{device} as the file name of the Data Carrier Detect device
using a device file as described above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -P
@itemx --ptt-type=@var{type}
Use @var{type} of Push-To-Talk device.  Supported types are
@code{RIG}, @code{DTR}, @code{RTS}, @code{PARALLEL}, @code{NONE},
overriding @acronym{PTT} type defined in the rig's backend.

Some side effects of this command are that when type is set to
@code{DTR}, read @acronym{PTT} state comes from Hamlib frontend, not
read from the radio.  When set to @code{NONE}, @acronym{PTT} state
cannot be read or set even if rig backend supports reading/setting
@acronym{PTT} status from the rig.

@item -D
@itemx --dcd-type=@var{type}
Use @var{type} of Data Carrier Detect device.  Supported types are
@code{RIG} (@acronym{CAT} command), @code{DSR}, @code{CTS}, @code{CD},
@code{PARALLEL}, @code{NONE}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -s
@itemx --serial-speed=@var{baud}
Set serial speed to @var{baud} rate. Uses @strong{maximum} serial
speed from rig backend capabilities (set by @option{-m} above) as the
default.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -c
@itemx --civaddr=@var{id}
Use @var{id} as the @acronym{CI-V} address to communicate with the
rig. Only useful for Icom radios and those using the Icom protocol.

@strong{N.B.} The @var{id} is in decimal notation, unless prefixed by
@code{0x}, in which case it is a hexadecimal value.

@item -t
@itemx --send-cmd-term=@var{char}
Change the termination @var{char} for text protocol when using the
@code{send_cmd} command.  The default value is @code{<CR>}
(@code{0x0d}). Non @acronym{ASCII} printable characters can be
specified as an @acronym{ASCII} number, in hexadecimal format,
prepended with @code{0x}. You may pass an empty string for no
termination char. The string '@code{-1}' tells @command{rigctl} to
switch to binary protocol. See the @code{send_cmd} command for further
explanation.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -L
@itemx --show-conf
List all config parameters for the radio defined with @option{-m}
above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -C
@itemx --set-conf=@var{parm}=@var{val}[,@var{parm}=@var{val},@dots{}]
Set config parameter. e.g.@: @code{stop_bits=2}

Use @option{-L} option for a list.

@item -l
@itemx --list
List all model numbers defined in Hamlib and exit.  As of 1.2.15.1 the
list is sorted by model number.

@strong{N.B.} In Linux the list can be scrolled back using
@kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageUp}/ @kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageDown}, or using the
scrollbars of a virtual terminal in X or the @command{cmd} window in
MS Windows.  The output can be piped to '@command{more}' or
'@command{less}', e.g.@: '@kbd{rigctl -l | more}'.

@item -u
@itemx --dump-caps
Dump capabilities for the radio defined with @option{-m} above and
exit.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -o
@itemx --vfo
Set vfo mode, requiring an extra @acronym{VFO} argument in front of
each appropriate command (except @command{set_vfo}!). Otherwise,
@code{currVFO} is assumed when this option is not set and an extra VFO
argument is not used.  See @command{chk_vfo} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -n
@itemx --no-restore-ai
On exit @command{rigctl} restores the state of auto information (AI)
on the controlled rig. If this is not desired, for example if you are
using @command{rigctl} to turn AI mode on or off, pass this option.

@item -i
@itemx --read-history
Read previously saved command and argument history from a file
(default '@file{$HOME/.rigctl_history}') for the current session.
Available when @command{rigctl} is built with Readline support.

@strong{N.B.} To read a history file stored in another directory, set
the @env{RIGCTL_HIST_DIR} environment variable, e.g.@:
'@kbd{RIGCTL_HIST_DIR=$HOME/tmp rigctl -i}'.  When
@env{RIGCTL_HIST_DIR} is not set, the value of @env{HOME} is used.

@item -I
@itemx --save-history
Write current session (and previously saved session(s) if @option{-i}
option is also given) command and argument history to a file (default
'@file{$HOME/.rigctl_history}') at the end of the current session.
Complete commands with arguments are saved as a single line to be
recalled and used or edited.  Available when @command{rigctl} is built
with Readline support.

To write a history file in another directory, set the
@env{RIGCTL_HIST_DIR} environment variable, e.g.@:
'@kbd{RIGCTL_HIST_DIR=$HOME/tmp rigctl -I}'.  When
@env{RIGCTL_HIST_DIR} is not set, the value of @env{HOME} is used.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Set verbose mode level, cumulative i.e.@: @option{-vvvvv} sets maximum
debugging output to @file{stderr}.

Five different levels of diagnostics can be output to @file{stderr}
and correspond to @option{-v} for @code{BUG}, @option{-vv} for
@code{ERR}, @option{-vvv} for @code{WARN}, @option{-vvvv} for
@code{VERBOSE}, or @option{-vvvvv} for @code{TRACE}.  Back end authors
will use the verbose facility to print critical values useful for
testing and will often ask for this output in response to a request
for help.

@item -Z
@itemx --debug-time-stamps
Enable time stamps on debug output.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Show summary of these options and exit.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -V
@itemx --version
Show version of @command{rigctl} and exit.

@end table

@quotation Note
Some options may not be implemented by a given backend and will return
an error.  This is most likely to occur with the @option{--set-conf}
and @option{--show-conf} options.
@end quotation

@node rigctl commands
@subsection @command{rigctl} commands
@cindex @command{rigctl} commands
@cindex commands, @command{rigctl}

Commands can be entered either as a single char, or as a long command
name.  Basically, the commands do not take a dash in front of them on
the command line, as the options do. They may be typed in when in
interactive mode or provided as argument(s) in command line interface
mode.  In interactive mode commands and their arguments may be entered
on a single line:

@example
Rig command: M LSB 2400
@end example

@noindent
or singly and @command{rigctl} will prompt for any needed values.

Since most of the Hamlib operations have a ``set'' and a ``get''
method, in general an upper case letter will be used for set methods
whereas the corresponding lower case letter refers to the get method.
Each operation also has a long name; prepend a backslash @kbd{\} to
enter a long command name.

@quotation
Example: Use @kbd{\dump_caps} to see what this radio can do.
@end quotation

@noindent
Be aware that the backend for the radio to be controlled, or the radio
itself may not support some commands. In that case, the operation will
fail with a Hamlib error message.

Here is a summary of the supported commands:

@itemize
@item
Command short name is followed by the long name which is followed by
any variable names.

@item
Some short commands are noted as hexadecimal digits due to the
limitation of upper and lower case letters available.  Use the
associated long command name instead.

@item
While a comma is used to separate variable names in this document,
they are not part of the command syntax used by @command{rigctl}.  Use
a space to separate values.

@item
In the case of ``set'' commands the variable @var{name} is replaced by
the value in the description.

@item
In the case of ``get'' commands the variable @var{name} is the key
name of the value returned.

@end itemize

@table @command
@item q
Exit @command{rigctl} in interactive mode (@kbd{q} is not case
sensitive).

When @command{rigctl} is controlling the rig directly, will close the
rig back end and port.  When @command{rigctl} is connected to
@command{rigctld} (rig model 2), the @acronym{TCP/IP} connection to
@command{rigctld} is closed and @command{rigctld} remains running,
available for another @acronym{TCP/IP} network connection.

@item F, set_freq @var{Frequency}
Set @var{Frequency}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item f, get_freq
Get @var{Frequency}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item M, set_mode @var{Mode}, @var{Passband}
Set @var{Mode} to one of: @code{USB}, @code{LSB}, @code{CW},
@code{CWR}, @code{RTTY}, @code{RTTYR}, @code{AM}, @code{FM},
@code{WFM}, @code{AMS}, @code{PKTLSB}, @code{PKTUSB}, @code{PKTFM},
@code{ECSSUSB}, @code{ECSSLSB}, @code{FAX}, @code{SAM}, @code{SAL},
@code{SAH}, @code{DSB}.

Set @var{Passband} frequency in Hertz, or @code{0} for the Hamlib
backend default. A value of @code{-1} may be passed which leaves the
rig passband unchanged from the current or default value for the mode
as defined by the rig.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument
instead of @var{Mode} will return a space separated list of radio
backend supported Modes.  Use this to determine the supported Modes of
a given radio backend.

@item m, get_mode
Get @var{Mode}, @var{Passband}.

Returns Mode as a string from @command{set_mode} above and Passband
frequency in Hertz.

@item V, set_vfo @var{VFO}
Set @var{VFO} to one of: @code{VFOA}, @code{VFOB}, @code{VFOC},
@code{currVFO}, @code{VFO}, @code{MEM}, @code{Main}, @code{Sub},
@code{TX}, @code{RX}.

In @acronym{VFO} mode only a single @acronym{VFO} parameter is
required.

@item v, get_vfo
Get current @var{VFO}.

Returns @acronym{VFO} as a string from @command{set_vfo} above.

@item J, set_rit @var{RIT}
Set @var{RIT}, in Hertz, can be a positive or negative value.

A value of @code{0} resets @acronym{RIT} and @emph{should} turn
@acronym{RIT} off.  If not, file a bug report against the Hamlib
backend.

@strong{N.B.} This functionality is under transition and in the future
will need to be activated with the @command{set_func} command.

@item j, get_rit
Get @var{RIT}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item Z, set_xit @var{XIT}
Set @var{XIT}, in Hertz, can be a positive or negative value.

A value of @code{0} resets @acronym{XIT} and @emph{should} turn
@acronym{XIT} off.  If not, file a bug report against the Hamlib
backend.

@strong{N.B.} This functionality is under transition and in the future
will need to be activated with the @command{set_func} command.

@item z, get_xit
Get @var{XIT}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item T, set_ptt @var{PTT}
Set @var{PTT} to one of: @code{0} (RX), @code{1} (TX), @code{2} (TX
mic), @code{3} (TX data).
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item t, get_ptt
Get @var{PTT} status.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x8b, get_dcd
Get @var{DCD} (squelch) status, @code{0} (Closed) or @code{1} (Open)
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item R, set_rptr_shift @var{Rptr Shift}
Set @var{Rptr Shift}: @code{+}, @code{-} or something else for none.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item r, get_rptr_shift
Get @var{Rptr Shift}.  Returns @code{+}, @code{-} or @code{None}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item O, set_rptr_offs @var{Rptr Offset}
Set @var{Rptr Offset}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item o, get_rptr_offs
Get @var{Rptr Offset}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item C, set_ctcss_tone @var{CTCSS Tone}
Set @var{CTCSS Tone}, in tenths of Hertz.

@acronym{CTCSS},
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_Tone-Coded_Squelch_System,
@dfn{Continuous Tone Coded Squelch System}}, is a method used to
reduce the annoyance of listening to other users on a shared two-way
communications radio channel by imposing a tone on the transmitted
signal.  Also known as @dfn{subaudible tone} and @acronym{PL},
@dfn{Private Line}.

@item c, get_ctcss_tone
Get @var{CTCSS Tone}, in tenths of Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item D, set_dcs_code @var{DCS Code}
Set @var{DCS Code}.

@acronym{DCS},
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital-Coded_Squelch#DCS,
@dfn{Digital-Coded Squelch}} is a digital version of @acronym{CTCSS}
which imposes a digital code on the transmitted signal.

@item d, get_dcs_code
Get @var{DCS Code}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x90, set_ctcss_sql @var{CTCSS Sql}
Set @var{CTCSS Sql} tone, in tenths of Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x91, get_ctcss_sql
Get @var{CTCSS Sql} tone, in tenths of Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x92, set_dcs_sql @var{DCS Sql}
Set @var{DCS Sql} code.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x93, get_dcs_sql
Get @var{DCS Sql} code.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item I, set_split_freq @var{Tx Frequency}
Set @var{TX Frequency}, in Hertz for ``split'' frequency operation.

See also @command{set_split_freq_mode} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item i, get_split_freq
Get @var{TX Frequency}, in Hertz for ``split'' frequency operation.

See also @command{get_split_freq_mode} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item X, set_split_mode @var{TX Mode}, @var{TX Passband}
Set @var{TX Mode} to one of: @code{AM}, @code{FM}, @code{CW},
@code{CWR}, @code{USB}, @code{LSB}, @code{RTTY}, @code{RTTYR},
@code{WFM}, @code{AMS}, @code{PKTLSB}, @code{PKTUSB}, @code{PKTFM},
@code{ECSSUSB}, @code{ECSSLSB}, @code{FAX}, @code{SAM}, @code{SAL},
@code{SAH}, @code{DSB}.

The @var{TX Passband} is the exact passband frequency in Hertz, or
@code{0} for the Hamlib backend default. A value of @code{-1} may be
passed which leaves the rig passband unchanged from the current or
default value for the mode as defined by the rig.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{TX Mode} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported TX Modes.  Use this to determine the supported TX Modes of a
given radio backend.

See also @command{set_split_freq_mode} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item x, get_split_mode
Get @var{TX Mode}, @var{TX Passband}.

Returns TX mode as a string from @command{set_split_mode} above and TX
passband in Hz.

See also @command{get_split_freq_mode} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item K, set_split_freq_mode @var{Tx Frequency}, @var{TX Mode}, @var{TX Passband}
Set @var{TX Frequency}, in Hertz for ``split'' frequency operation.
Set @var{TX Mode} to one of: @code{AM}, @code{FM}, @code{CW},
@code{CWR}, @code{USB}, @code{LSB}, @code{RTTY}, @code{RTTYR},
@code{WFM}, @code{AMS}, @code{PKTLSB}, @code{PKTUSB}, @code{PKTFM},
@code{ECSSUSB}, @code{ECSSLSB}, @code{FAX}, @code{SAM}, @code{SAL},
@code{SAH}, @code{DSB}.

The @var{TX Passband} is the exact passband frequency in Hertz, or
@code{0} for the Hamlib backend default. A value of @code{-1} may be
passed which leaves the rig passband unchanged from the current or
default value for the mode as defined by the rig.

This is a convenience function that combines the effect of
@command{set_split_freq} and @command{set_split_mode}. It should be
used when both are required since it allows the back end to optimize
the operations. For example on many Icom rigs the current VFO must be
changed temporarily while executing these commands and that can
disrupt receive or transmit, using this function may minimize that
disruption.

See also @command{set_split_freq} and @command{set_split_mode} above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item k, get_split_freq_mode
Get @var{TX Frequency}, in Hertz for ``split'' frequency operation
along with The @var{TX Mode} as a string from @command{set_split_mode}
above and @var{TX Passband} in Hz.

This is a convenience function that combines the effect of
@command{get_split_freq} and @command{get_split_mode}. It should be
used when both are required since it allows the back end to optimize
the operations. For example on many Icom rigs the current VFO must be
changed temporarily while executing these commands and that can
disrupt receive or transmit, using this function may minimize that
disruption.

See also @command{get_split_freq} and @command{get_split_mode} above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item S, set_split_vfo @var{Split}, @var{TX VFO}
Set @var{Split} mode, @code{0} (off) or @code{1} (on), and @var{TX VFO}
from @command{set_vfo} above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item s, get_split_vfo
Get @var{Split} mode, @code{0} (off) or @code{1} (on), and @var{TX VFO}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item N, set_ts @var{Tuning Step}
Set @var{Tuning Step}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item n, get_ts
Get @var{Tuning Step}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item U, set_func @var{Func}, @var{Func Status}
Set @var{Func}, @var{Func Status}.

@var{Func} is one of: @code{FAGC}, @code{NB}, @code{COMP}, @code{VOX},
@code{TONE}, @code{TSQL}, @code{SBKIN}, @code{FBKIN}, @code{ANF},
@code{NR}, @code{AIP}, @code{APF}, @code{MON}, @code{MN}, @code{RF},
@code{ARO}, @code{LOCK}, @code{MUTE}, @code{VSC}, @code{REV},
@code{SQL}, @code{ABM}, @code{BC}, @code{MBC}, @code{RIT}, @code{AFC},
@code{SATMODE}, @code{SCOPE}, @code{RESUME}, @code{TBURST},
@code{TUNER}, @code{XIT}.

Func Status argument is @code{1} for ``activate'', @code{0} for
``de-activate'', much as TRUE/FALSE definitions in the C/C++ languages
(true is non-zero and false is zero).

@strong{N.B.}  Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{Func} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``set'' functions.  Use this to determine the supported
functions of a given radio backend.

@item u, get_func @var{Func}
Get @var{Func Status}.

Returns @var{Func Status} as a non null value for the @var{Func} passed.
@var{Func} is a token from the list in @command{set_func} above.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{Func} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``get'' functions.  Use this to determine the supported
functions of a given radio backend.

@item L, set_level @var{Level}, @var{Level Value}
Set @var{Level}, @var{Level Value}.

@var{Level} is one of: @code{PREAMP}, @code{ATT}, @code{VOX}, @code{AF},
@code{RF}, @code{SQL}, @code{IF}, @code{APF}, @code{NR}, @code{PBT_IN},
@code{PBT_OUT}, @code{CWPITCH}, @code{RFPOWER}, @code{MICGAIN},
@code{KEYSPD}, @code{NOTCHF}, @code{COMP}, @code{AGC}(@code{0}:OFF,
@code{1}:SUPERFAST, @code{2}:FAST, @code{3}:SLOW, @code{4}:USER,
@code{5}:MEDIUM, @code{6}:AUTO), @code{BKINDL}, @code{BAL},
@code{METER}, @code{VOXGAIN}, @code{ANTIVOX}, @code{SLOPE_LOW},
@code{SLOPE_HIGH}, @code{RAWSTR}, @code{SWR}, @code{ALC},
@code{STRENGTH}.

The @var{Level Value} can be a float or an integer.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Level} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``set'' levels.  Use this to determine the supported levels of a
given radio backend.

@item l, get_level @var{Level}
Get @var{Level Value}.

Returns @var{Level Value} as a float or integer for the @var{Level}
passed.  @var{Level} is a token from the list in @command{set_level}
above.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Level} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``get'' levels.  Use this to determine the supported levels of a
given radio backend.

@item P, set_parm @var{Parm}, @var{Parm Value}
Set @var{Parm}, @var{Parm Value}

@var{Parm} is one of: @code{ANN}, @code{APO}, @code{BACKLIGHT},
@code{BEEP}, @code{TIME}, @code{BAT}, @code{KEYLIGHT}.

@strong{N.B.}  Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{Parm} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``set'' parameters.  Use this to determine the supported
parameters of a given radio backend.

@item p, get_parm @var{Parm}
Get @var{Parm Value}.

Returns @var{Parm Value} as a float or integer for the @var{Parm}
passed.  @var{Parm} is a token from the list in @command{set_parm}
above.

@strong{N.B.}  Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{Parm} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``get'' parameters.  Use this to determine the supported
parameters of a given radio backend.

@item B, set_bank @var{Bank}
Set @var{Bank}.  Sets the current memory bank number.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item E, set_mem @var{Memory#}
Set @var{Memory#} channel number.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item e, get_mem
Get @var{Memory#} channel number.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item G, vfo_op @var{Mem/VFO Op}
Perform @var{Mem/VFO Op}.

@var{Mem/VFO Op}eration is one of: @code{CPY}, @code{XCHG},
@code{FROM_VFO}, @code{TO_VFO}, @code{MCL}, @code{UP}, @code{DOWN},
@code{BAND_UP}, @code{BAND_DOWN}, @code{LEFT}, @code{RIGHT},
@code{TUNE}, @code{TOGGLE}.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Mem/VFO Op} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``set'' Mem/VFO Ops.  Use this to determine the supported Mem/VFO
Ops of a given radio backend.

@item g, scan @var{Scan Fct}, @var{Scan Channel}
Perform @var{Scan Fct} @var{Scan Channel}.

Scan function/channel is one of: @code{STOP}, @code{MEM}, @code{SLCT},
@code{PRIO}, @code{PROG}, @code{DELTA}, @code{VFO}, @code{PLT}.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Scan Fct} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported Scan Functions.  Use this to determine the supported Scan
Functions of a given radio backend.

@item H, set_channel @var{Channel}
Set memory @var{Channel} data. Not implemented yet.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item h, get_channel
Get memory @var{Channel} data. Not implemented yet.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item A, set_trn @var{Transceive}
Set @var{Transceive} mode (reporting event): @code{OFF}, @code{RIG},
@code{POLL}.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Transceive} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported Scan Transceive modes.  Use this to determine the supported
Transceive modes of a given radio backend.

@item a, get_trn
Get @var{Transceive} mode (reporting event) as in @command{set_trn}
above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item Y, set_ant @var{Antenna}
Set @var{Antenna} number (@code{0}, @code{1}, @code{2}, @dots{}).
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item y, get_ant
Get @var{Antenna} number (@code{0}, @code{1}, @code{2}, @dots{}).
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item *, reset @var{Reset}
Perform rig @var{Reset}.

@code{0} = None, @code{1} = Software reset, @code{2} = @acronym{VFO}
reset, @code{4} = Memory Clear reset, @code{8} = Master reset.  Since
these values are defined as a bitmask in @file{rig.h}, it should be
possible to @code{AND} these values together to do multiple resets at
once, if the backend supports it or supports a reset action via rig
control at all.

@item b, send_morse @var{Morse}
Send @var{Morse} symbols.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x87, set_powerstat @var{Power Status}
Set power On/Off/Standby @var{Power Status}.

@code{0} = Power Off, @code{1} = Power On, @code{2} = Power Standby.
Defined as a bitmask in @file{rig.h}.

@item 0x88, get_powerstat
Get power On/Off/Standby @var{Power Status} as in
@command{set_powerstat} above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x89, send_dtmf @var{Digits}
Set DTMF @var{Digits}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x8a, recv_dtmf
Get DTMF @var{Digits}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item _, get_info
Get misc information about the rig

@acronym{VFO} parameter not used in '@acronym{VFO} mode'.

@item 1, dump_caps
Not a real rig remote command, it just dumps capabilities, i.e. what
the backend knows about this model, and what it can do.

TODO: Ensure this is in a consistent format so it can be read into a
hash, dictionary, etc.  Bug reports requested.

@strong{N.B.} This command will produce many lines of output so be
very careful if using a fixed length array!  For example, running this
command against the Dummy backend results in over 5kB of text output.

@acronym{VFO} parameter not used in '@acronym{VFO} mode'.

@item 2, power2mW @var{Power 0.0..1.0}, @var{Frequency}, @var{Mode}
Returns @var{Power mW}

Converts a @var{Power} value in a range of @code{0.0..1.0} to
the real transmit power in milli-Watts (integer).  The @var{Frequency}
and @var{Mode} also need to be provided as output power may vary
according to these values.

@acronym{VFO} parameter not used in '@acronym{VFO} mode'.

@item 4, mW2power @var{Power mW}, @var{Frequency}, @var{Mode}
Returns @var{Power 0.0..1.0}

Converts the real transmit power in milli-Watts (integer) to a
@var{Power} value in a range of @code{[0.0..1.0]}.  The
@var{Frequency} and @var{Mode} also need to be provided as output
power may vary according to these values.

@acronym{VFO} parameter not used in '@acronym{VFO} mode'.

@item w, send_cmd @var{Cmd}
Send raw command string to rig.  This is useful for testing and
troubleshooting rig commands and responses when developing a backend.

For binary protocols enter values as @code{\0xAA\0xBB}.  Expect a
@var{Reply} from the rig which will likely be a binary block or an
@acronym{ASCII} string depending on the rig's protocol (see your
radio's computer control documentation).

The command terminator, set by the @option{--send-cmd-term} option
above, will terminate each command string sent to the radio.  This
character should not be a part of the input string.
@end table

@node rigctl readline support
@subsection @command{rigctl} Readline support
@cindex @command{rigctl} Readline support
@cindex Readline support, @command{rigctl}

If Readline library development files are found at configure time,
@command{rigctl} will be conditonally built with Readline support for
command and argument entry.  Readline command key bindings are at
their defaults as described in the
@url{http://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/rluserman.html,
Readline manual} although @command{rigctl} sets the name @code{rigctl}
which can be used in @code{Conditional Init Constructs} in the
Readline Init File (@file{$HOME/.inputrc} by default) for custom
keybindings unique to @command{rigctl}.

Command history is available with Readline support as described in the
@url{http://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/history.html#SEC1,
Readline History manual}.  Command and argument strings are stored as
single lines even when arguments are prompted for input individually.
Commands and arguments are not validated and are stored as typed with
values separated by a single space.

Normally session history is not saved, however, use of either of the
@option{-i}/@option{--read-history} or
@option{-I}/@option{--save-history} options when starting
@command{rigctl} will cause any previously saved history to be read in
and/or the current and any previous session history (assuming the
@option{-i} and @option{-I} options are given together) will be
written out when @command{rigctl} is closed.  Each option is mutually
exclusive, i.e. either may be given separately or in combination.
This is useful to save a set of commands and then read them later but
not write the modified history for a consistent set of test commands
in interactive mode, for example.

History is stored in @file{$HOME/.rigctl_history} by default although
the destination directory may be changed by setting the
@env{RIGCTL_HIST_DIR} environment variable.  When
@env{RIGCTL_HIST_DIR} is unset, the value of the @env{HOME}
environment variable is used instead.  Only the destination directory
may be changed at this time.

If Readline support is not found at configure time the original
internal command handler is used.  Readline is not used for
@command{rigctl} commands entered on the command line regardless if
Readline support is built in or not.

@quotation Note
Readline support is not included in the MS Windows 32 binary builds
supplied by the Hamlib Project.  Running @command{rigctl} on the MS
Windows 32 platform in the @command{cmd} shell does give session
command line history, however, it is not saved to disk between
sessions.
@end quotation

@node rotctl
@section @command{rotctl}
@cindex rotctl

Identical in function to @command{rigctl}, @command{rotctl} provides a
means for testing Hamlib functions useful for rotor control and
@acronym{QRA} locator computations.  As rotors have a much narrower
scope than radios, there are fewer command line options and commands
for @command{rotctl}.

@menu
* Introduction to rotctl::
* rotctl invocation::
* rotctl command line options::
* rotctl commands::
* rotctl readline support::
@end menu

@node Introduction to rotctl
@subsection Introduction to @command{rotctl}
@cindex Introduction to @command{rotctl}
@cindex @command{rotctl}, introduction to

@command{rotctl} is a character based interactive program and a
command line program able to set or query a rotor's value with a
single command.  @command{rotctl} is invoked from a shell command
prompt with various options and additional commands.

In its most simple use as a command line program, @command{rotctl} is
used to set frequency and mode by typing commands after any
@command{rotctl} options:

@example
@kbd{rotctl P 145.0 23.0}
@kbd{rotctl M 8 25}
@end example

@noindent
and then query those values:

@example
@kbd{rotctl p}
@end example

Entering interactive mode is a simple matter of not placing any
commands after any @command{rotctl} options:

@example
@kbd{rotctl}
@end example

@noindent
Entering interactive mode allows successive commands to be entered
without exiting @command{rotctl}.  Recent additions to
@command{rotctl} allow command editing and history recall through use
of the @url{ http://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/rltop.html,
Readline} library.

Interactive mode is indicated by the spartan prompt:

@example
Rotator command:
@end example

@noindent
Commands are given at the prompt:

@example
Rotator command: @kbd{M}
Direction: 16
Speed: 60

Rotator command: @kbd{p}
Azimuth: 11.352000
Elevation: 0.000000

Rotator command: @kbd{p}
Azimuth: 27.594000
Elevation: 0.000000

Rotator command:
@end example

An additional prompt is printed when more information is required by
the command.  For @kbd{M} above, @command{rotctl} prompted for the
``Direction'' and ``Speed'' values.  For @kbd{p} above, @command{rotctl}
returned the ``Azimuth'' and ``Elevation'' values without further prompts.
The command prompt is returned after each command invocation.

The above examples invoked @command{rotctl} without specifying a rotor
model.  This is a feature where the Hamlib internal rotor dummy is
used instead.  The dummy rotor provides a way to test Hamlib functions
with out the need for actual rotor hardware.  However, to develop back
end capability for a given rotor, having the actual radio connected to
the computer is necessary for debugging.

For example, to quickly set position for RotorEZ:

@example
@kbd{rotctl -m 401 -r /dev/rotor P 100.0 0.0}
@end example

@noindent
and to query the position:

@example
@kbd{rotctl -m 401 -r /dev/rotor p}
100.000000
0.000000

@end example

@noindent
The returned values do not have the prompt strings associated with
interactive mode as shown above.

The @option{-m} option takes a numeric value that corresponds to a
given rotor back end model.  The @option{-r} option takes the path to
the port device on @acronym{POSIX} and the device name on MS Windows.

@quotation Note
A complete list of supported radio models may be seen by use of the
@option{-l} option:

@example
@kbd{rotctl -l}
 Rig #  Mfg              Model         Version    Status
     1  Hamlib           Dummy         0.5        Beta
     2  Hamlib           NET rotctl    0.3        Beta
   201  Hamlib           EasycommI     0.3        Beta
   202  Hamlib           EasycommII    0.3        Beta
.
.
.
  1201  AMSAT            IF-100        0.1        Untested
  1301  LA7LKA           ts7400        0.1        Beta
  1401  Celestron        NexStar       0.1        Untested
@end example

@noindent
The list is long so use @kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageUp}/
@kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageDown} on Linux, @kbd{@key{ScrollLock}} then
@kbd{@key{PageUp}}/@kbd{@key{PageDown}} on Free BSD, or use the
scrollbar to the virtual terminal window (@command{cmd} window on MS
Windows) or the output can be piped to '@command{more}' or
'@command{less}', e.g.@: '@kbd{rotctl -l | more}' to scroll back up
the list.  The list is sorted numerically by model number since Hamlib
1.2.15.1.  Model numbers of a manufacturer/ protocol family are
grouped together.
@end quotation


@node rotctl invocation
@subsection @command{rotctl} invocation
@cindex @command{rotctl} invocation
@cindex invocation, @command{rotctl}

Here are some additional examples for invoking @command{rotctl} for
various situations.

Start @command{rotctl} for RotorEZ using the first serial port on
Linux:

@example
rotctl -m 401 -r /dev/ttyS0
@end example

@noindent
Start @command{rotctl} for RotorEZ using @code{COM2} on MS Windows:

@example
rotctl -m 401 -r COM2
@end example

@noindent
Connect to a running @command{rotctld} with rotor model 2 (@code{NET rotctl}) on the
local host and specifying the @acronym{TCP} port, and querying the position:

@example
rotctl -m 2 -r localhost:4533 \get_pos
@end example

@node rotctl command line options
@subsection @command{rotctl} command line options
@cindex @command{rotctl} command line options
@cindex Command line options, @command{rotctl}

@command{rotctl} accepts the following options:

@table @option
@item -m
@itemx --model=@var{id}
Select rotator model number. See model list (use @kbd{rotctl -l}).

@strong{N.B.} @command{rotctl} (or third party software) will use
rotor model 2 for NET rotctl (@command{rotctld}).

@item -r
@itemx --rot-file=@var{device}
Use @var{device} as the file name of the port the rotor is connected.
Often a serial port, but could be a USB to serial adapter.  Typically
@file{/dev/ttyS0} , @file{/dev/ttyS1} , @file{/dev/ttyUSB0} , etc.@:
on Linux or @file{COM1} , @file{COM2} , etc.@: on MS Windows.  The
special string @kbd{uh-rig} may be given to enable micro-ham device
support.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -s
@itemx --serial-speed=@var{baud}
Set serial speed to @var{baud} rate. Uses @strong{maximum} serial
speed from rotor backend capabilities as the default.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -t
@itemx --send-cmd-term=@var{char}
Change the termination @var{char} for text protocol when using the
@code{send_cmd} command.  The default value is @code{<CR>}
(@code{0x0d}). Non @acronym{ASCII} printable characters can be
specified as an @acronym{ASCII} number, in hexadecimal format,
prepended with @code{0x}. You may pass an empty string for no
termination char. The string '@code{-1}' tells @command{rotctl} to
switch to binary protocol. See the @code{send_cmd} command for further
explanation.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -L
@itemx --show-conf
List all config parameters for the rotor defined with @option{-m}
above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -C
@itemx --set-conf=@var{parm}=@var{val}[,@var{parm}=@var{val},@dots{}]
Set config parameter. e.g.@: @code{stop_bits=2}

Use @option{-L} option for a list.

@item -l
@itemx --list
List all model numbers defined in Hamlib and exit.  As of 1.2.15.1 the
list is sorted by model number.

@strong{N.B.} In Linux the list can be scrolled back using
@kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageUp}/ @kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageDown}, or using the
scrollbars of a virtual terminal in X or the @command{cmd} window in
MS Windows.  The output can be piped to '@command{more}' or
'@command{less}', e.g.@: '@kbd{rotctl -l | more}'.

@item -u
@itemx --dump-caps
Dump capabilities for the rotor defined with @option{-m} above and
exit.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -i
@itemx --read-history
Read previously saved command and argument history from a file
(default '@file{$HOME/.rotctl_history}') for the current session.
Available when @command{rotctl} is built with Readline support.

@strong{N.B.} To read a history file stored in another directory, set
the @env{ROTCTL_HIST_DIR} environment variable, e.g.@:
'@kbd{ROTCTL_HIST_DIR=$HOME/tmp rotctl -i}'.  When @env{ROTCTL_HIST_DIR}
is not set, the value of @env{HOME} is used.

@item -I
@itemx --save-history
Write current session (and previously saved session(s) if @option{-i}
option is also given) command and argument history to a file (default
'@file{$HOME/.rotctl_history}') at the end of the current session.
Complete commands with arguments are saved as a single line to be
recalled and used or edited.  Available when @command{rotctl} is built
with Readline support.

To write a history file in another directory, set the
@env{ROTCTL_HIST_DIR} environment variable, e.g.@:
'@kbd{ROTCTL_HIST_DIR=$HOME/tmp rotctl -I}'.  When @env{ROTCTL_HIST_DIR}
is not set, the value of @env{HOME} is used.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Set verbose mode level, cumulative i.e.@: @option{-vvvvv} sets maximum
debugging output to @file{stderr}.

Five different levels of diagnostics can be output to @file{stderr}
and correspond to @option{-v} for @code{BUG}, @option{-vv} for
@code{ERR}, @option{-vvv} for @code{WARN}, @option{-vvvv} for
@code{VERBOSE}, or @option{-vvvvv} for @code{TRACE}.  Back end authors
will use the verbose facility to print critical values useful for
testing and will often ask for this output in response to a request
for help.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Show summary of these options and exit.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -V
@itemx --version
Show version of @command{rotctl} and exit.
@end table

@quotation Note
Some options may not be implemented by a given backend and will return
an error.  This is most likely to occur with the @option{--set-conf}
and @option{--show-conf} options.
@end quotation

@node rotctl commands
@subsection @command{rotctl} commands
@cindex @command{rotctl} commands
@cindex commands, @command{rotctl}

@xref{rigctl commands}, for command syntax.

@strong{Rotor commands}

Here is a summary of the supported commands:

@table @command
@item q
Exit @command{rotctl} in interactive mode (@kbd{q} is not case
sensitive).

When @command{rotctl} is controlling the rotor directly, will close
the rotor back end and port.  When @command{rotctl} is connected to
@command{rotctld} (rotor model 2), the @acronym{TCP/IP} connection to
@command{rotctld} is closed and @command{rotctld} remains running,
available for another @acronym{TCP/IP} network connection.

@item P, set_pos @var{Azimuth}, @var{Elevation}
Set position: @var{Azimuth} and @var{Elevation} as double precision
floating point values.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item p, get_pos
Get position: @var{Azimuth} and @var{Elevation} as double precision
floating point values.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item M, move @var{Direction}, @var{Speed}
Move the rotator in a specific direction at the given rate.

Values are integers where @var{Direction} is defined as @code{2} = Up,
@code{4} = Down, @code{8} = Left, and @code{16} = Right.  @var{Speed}
is an integer between @code{1} and @code{100}.

@strong{N.B.} Not all backends that implement the move command use the
Speed value.  At this time only the gs232a utilizes the Speed
parameter.

@item S, stop
Stop the rotator.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item K, park
Park the antenna.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item C, set_conf @var{Token}, @var{Value}
Set a configuration parameter.  It is safe to give @var{Token} a value
of @code{0} (zero).  @var{Value} may be a string up to 20 characters.

See @option{-L} output.

@item R, reset @var{Reset}
Reset the rotator.

Integer value of @code{1} for Reset All.

@item _, get_info
Get misc information on the rotator.

At the moment returns @var{Model Name}.

@item w, send_cmd @var{Cmd}
Send raw command string to the rotator.

@code{<CR>} (or @option{send-cmd-term}, see @option{-t} option) is
appended automatically at the end of the command for text protocols.
For binary protocols, enter values as @code{\0xAA\0xBB}.
@end table

@strong{Locator Commands}

These commands offer conversions of Degrees Minutes Seconds to other
formats, Maidenhead square locator conversions and distance and
azimuth conversions.

@table @command
@item L, lonlat2loc @var{Longitude}, @var{Latitude}, @var{Loc Len 2..12}
Returns the Maidenhead locator for the given @var{Longitude} and
@var{Latitude}.

Both are floating point values.  The precision of the returned square
is controlled by @var{Loc Len} which should be an even numbered
integer value between @code{2} and @code{12}.

For example, @kbd{L -170.000000 -85.000000 12} returns @samp{Locator:
AA55AA00AA00}.

@item l, loc2lonlat @var{Locator}
Returns @var{Longitude} and @var{Latitude} in decimal degrees at the
approximate center of the requested grid square (despite the use of
double precision variables internally, some rounding error occurs).
West longitude is expressed as a negative value.  South latitude is
expressed as a negative value.  Locator can be from 2 to 12 characters
in length.

For example, @kbd{l AA55AA00AA00} returns @samp{Longitude: -169.999983
Latitude: -84.999991}.

@item D, dms2dec @var{Degrees}, @var{Minutes}, @var{Seconds}, @var{S/W}
Returns @var{Dec Degrees}, a signed floating point value.

@var{Degrees} and @var{Minutes} are integer values and @var{Seconds}
is a floating point value.  @var{S/W} is a flag with @code{1}
indicating South latitude or West longitude and @code{0} North or East
(the flag is needed as computers don't recognize a signed zero even
though only the @var{Degrees} value only is typically signed in
@acronym{DMS} notation).

@item d, dec2dms @var{Dec Degrees}
Returns @var{Degrees}, @var{Minutes}, @var{Seconds}, @var{S/W}.

Values are as in @command{dms2dec} above.

@item E, dmmm2dec @var{Degrees}, @var{Dec Minutes}, @var{S/W}
Returns @var{Dec Degrees}, a signed floating point value.

@var{Degrees} is an integer value and @var{Minutes} is a floating
point value.  @var{S/W} is a flag with @code{1} indicating South
latitude or West longitude and @code{0} North or East (the flag is
needed as computers don't recognize a signed zero even though only the
@var{Degrees} value only is typically signed in @acronym{DMS}
notation).

@item e, dec2dmmm @var{Dec Deg}
Returns @var{Degrees}, @var{Minutes}, @var{S/W}.

Values are as in @command{dmmm2dec} above.

@item B, qrb @var{Lon 1}, @var{Lat 1}, @var{Lon 2}, @var{Lat 2}
Returns @var{Distance} and @var{Azimuth} where @var{Distance} is in km
and @var{Azimuth} is in degrees.

All @var{Lon}/@var{Lat} values are signed floating point numbers.

@item A, a_sp2a_lp @var{Short Path Deg}
Returns @var{Long Path Deg} or @code{-RIG_EINVAL} upon input error.

Both are floating point values within the range @code{0.00} to
@var{360.00}.

@item a, d_sp2d_lp @var{Short Path km}
Returns @var{Long Path km}.

Both are floating point values.
@end table

@node rotctl readline support
@subsection @command{rotctl} Readline support
@cindex @command{rotctl} Readline support
@cindex Readline support, @command{rotctl}

If Readline library development files are found at configure time,
@command{rotctl} will be conditonally built with Readline support for
command and argument entry.  Readline command key bindings are at
their defaults as described in the
@url{http://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/rluserman.html,
Readline manual} although @command{rotctl} sets the name @code{rotctl}
which can be used in @code{Conditional Init Constructs} in the
Readline Init File (@file{$HOME/.inputrc} by default) for custom
keybindings unique to @command{rotctl}.

Command history is available with Readline support as described in the
@url{http://cnswww.cns.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/history.html#SEC1,
Readline History manual}.  Command and argument strings are stored as
single lines even when arguments are prompted for input individually.
Commands and arguments are not validated and are stored as typed with
values separated by a single space.

Normally session history is not saved, however, use of either of the
@option{-i}/@option{--read-history} or
@option{-I}/@option{--save-history} options when starting
@command{rotctl} will cause any previously saved history to be read in
and/or the current and any previous session history (assuming the
@option{-i} and @option{-I} options are given together) will be
written out when @command{rotctl} is closed.  Each option is mutually
exclusive, i.e. either may be given separately or in combination.
This is useful to save a set of commands and then read them later but
not write the modified history for a consistent set of test commands
in interactive mode, for example.

History is stored in @file{$HOME/.rotctl_history} by default although the
destination directory may be changed by setting the
@env{ROTCTL_HIST_DIR} environment variable.  When
@env{ROTCTL_HIST_DIR} is unset, the value of the @env{HOME} environment
variable is used instead.  Only the destination directory may be
changed at this time.

If Readline support is not found at configure time the original
internal command handler is used.  Readline is not used for
@command{rotctl} commands entered on the command line regardless if
Readline support is built in or not.

@quotation Note
Readline support is not included in the MS Windows 32 binary builds
supplied by the Hamlib Project.  Running @command{rotctl} on the MS
Windows 32 platform in the @command{cmd} shell does give session
command line history, however, it is not saved to disk between
sessions.
@end quotation

@node rigctld
@section @command{rigctld}
@cindex rigctld

The @command{rigctld} program is a network server that accepts the
familiar commands of @command{rigctl} and provides the response data
over a @acronym{TCP/IP} network socket to an application.  In this
manner an application can access a @command{rigctl} instance from
nearly anywhere (caveat, no security is currently provided by
@command{rigctl}).  Applications using @command{rigctl} do not link to
Hamlib nor use its C API.

@menu
* Introduction to rigctld::
* rigctld invocation::
* rigctld command line options::
* rigctld commands::
* rigctld protocol::
@end menu

@node Introduction to rigctld
@subsection Introduction to @command{rigctld}
@cindex Introduction to @command{rigctld}
@cindex @command{rigctld}, introduction to

Multiple radios can be controlled on different @acronym{TCP} ports by
use of multiple @command{rigctld} processes.  The syntax of the
commands are the same as @command{rigctl}. It is hoped that
@command{rigctld} will be especially useful for client authors using
languages such as @url{http://www.perl.org/, Perl},
@url{http://www.python.org/, Python}, @url{http://php.net/, PHP},
@url{http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/, Ruby}, @url{http://www.tcl.tk/,
TCL}, and others.

@command{rigctld} communicates to a client through a @acronym{TCP}
network socket using text commands shared with @command{rigctl}. The
protocol is simple; commands are sent to @command{rigctld} on one line
and @command{rigctld} responds to ``get'' commands with the requested
values, one per line, when successful, otherwise, it responds with one
line @samp{RPRT x}, where @samp{x} is a negative number indicating the
Hamlib error code.  Commands that do not return values respond with
the line @samp{RPRT x}, where @samp{x} is zero when successful,
otherwise a regative number indicating the Hamlib error code.  Each
line is terminated with a newline @code{\n} character.  This protocol
is primarily for use by the @code{NET rigctl} (rig model 2) backend.
@xref{rigctld Default protocol}.

A separate Extended Response protocol extends the above behavior by
echoing the received command string as a header, any returned values
as a key: value pair, and the @samp{RPRT x} string as the end of
response marker which includes the Hamlib success or failure value.
Consider using this protocol for clients that will interact with
@command{rigctld} directly through a @acronym{TCP} network socket.
@xref{rigctld Extended Response protocol}.

@node rigctld invocation
@subsection @command{rigctld} invocation
@cindex @command{rigctld} invocation
@cindex invocation, @command{rigctld}

The command line invocation for @command{rigctld} is similar to
@command{rigctl} except that in POSIX environments a trailing @kbd{&}
is appended to the command string to ``background'' the
@command{rigctld} process so the shell can be used to run other
commands while @command{rigctld} continues to run.

Here are some examples for invoking @command{rigctld}.

Start @command{rigctld} for a Yaesu FT-920 using a USB-to-serial
adapter and backgrounding:

@example
rigctld -m 114 -r /dev/ttyUSB1 &
@end example

Start @command{rigctld} for a Yaesu FT-920 using a USB to serial
adapter while setting baud rate and stop bits, and backgrounding:

@example
rigctld -m 114 -r /dev/ttyUSB1 -s 4800 -C stop_bits=2 &
@end example

Start @command{rigctld} for an Elecraft K3 using @code{COM2} on MS
Windows:

@example
rigctld -m 229 -r COM2 -T 127.0.0.1 -t 4532
@end example

@quotation Note
On MS Windows the use of the @option{-T} and @option{-t} options appear
to be necessary to set the @acronym{IP} address and @acronym{TCP} port
or else the network socket cannot be found.  On @acronym{POSIX} systems
the @command{rigctld} default values will be used.
@end quotation

Connect to the already running @command{rigctld}, and set current
frequency to 14.266 MHz with a 1 second read timeout using the default
protocol from the shell prompt:

@example
echo "\set_freq 14266000" | nc -w 1 localhost 4532
@end example

Connect to a running @command{rigctld} with @command{rigctl} on the
local host:

@example
rigctl -m2
@end example

@node rigctld command line options
@subsection @command{rigctld} command line options
@cindex @command{rigctld} command line options
@cindex Command line options, @command{rigctld}

Many of the @command{rigctld} command line options are shared
with @command{rigctl} with a few additions.

@command{rigctld} accepts the following options:

@table @option
@item -m
@itemx --model=@var{id}
Select radio model number. See model list (use @kbd{rigctld -l}).
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -r
@itemx --rig-file=@var{device}
Use @var{device} as the file name of the port the radio is connected.
Often a serial port, but could be a USB to serial adapter.  Typically
@file{/dev/ttyS0} , @file{/dev/ttyS1} , @file{/dev/ttyUSB0} , etc.@:
on Linux or @file{COM1} , @file{COM2} , etc.@: on MS Windows.  The
special string @kbd{uh-rig} may be given to enable micro-ham device
support.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -p
@itemx --ptt-file=@var{device}
Use @var{device} as the file name of the Push-To-Talk device using a
device file as described above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -d
@itemx --dcd-file=@var{device}
Use @var{device} as the file name of the Data Carrier Detect device
using a device file as described above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -P
@itemx --ptt-type=@var{type}
Use @var{type} of Push-To-Talk device.  Supported types are
@code{RIG}, @code{DTR}, @code{RTS}, @code{PARALLEL}, @code{NONE},
overriding @acronym{PTT} type defined in the rig's backend.

Some side effects of this command are that when type is set to
@code{DTR}, read @acronym{PTT} state comes from Hamlib frontend, not
read from the radio.  When set to @code{NONE}, @acronym{PTT} state
cannot be read or set even if rig backend supports reading/setting
@acronym{PTT} status from the rig.

@item -D
@itemx --dcd-type=@var{type}
Use @var{type} of Data Carrier Detect device.  Supported types are
@code{RIG} (@acronym{CAT} command), @code{DSR}, @code{CTS}, @code{CD},
@code{PARALLEL}, @code{NONE}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -s
@itemx --serial-speed=@var{baud}
Set serial speed to @var{baud} rate. Uses @strong{maximum} serial
speed from rig backend capabilities (set by @option{-m} above) as the
default.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -c
@itemx --civaddr=@var{id}
Use @var{id} as the @acronym{CI-V} address to communicate with the
rig. Only useful for Icom radios and those using the Icom protocol.

@strong{N.B.} The @var{id} is in decimal notation, unless prefixed by
@code{0x}, in which case it is a hexadecimal value.

@item -T
@itemx --listen-addr=@var{IPADDR}
Use @var{IPADDR} as the listening @acronym{IP} address. The default is ANY.

@strong{N.B.} On MS Windows setting a specific @acronym{IP} address is
likely necessary.

@item -t
@itemx --port=@var{number}
Use @var{number} as the @acronym{TCP} listening port. The default is
@code{4532}.

@strong{N.B.} As @command{rotctld}'s default port is @code{4533}, it
is advisable to use even numbered ports for @command{rigctld}, e.g.
@code{4532}, @code{4534}, @code{4536}, etc.

@item -L
@itemx --show-conf
List all config parameters for the radio defined with @option{-m}
above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -C
@itemx --set-conf=@var{parm}=@var{val}[,@var{parm}=@var{val},@dots{}]
Set config parameter. e.g.@: @code{stop_bits=2}

Use @option{-L} option for a list.

@item -l
@itemx --list
List all model numbers defined in Hamlib and exit.  As of 1.2.15.1 the
list is sorted by model number.

@strong{N.B.} In Linux the list can be scrolled back using
@kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageUp}/ @kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageDown}, or using the
scrollbars of a virtual terminal in X or the @command{cmd} window in
MS Windows.  The output can be piped to '@command{more}' or
'@command{less}', e.g.@: '@kbd{rigctl -l | more}'.

@item -u
@itemx --dump-caps
Dump capabilities for the radio defined with @option{-m} above and
exit.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -o
@itemx --vfo
Set vfo mode, requiring an extra @acronym{VFO} argument in front of
each appropriate command (except @command{set_vfo}!). Otherwise,
@code{currVFO} is assumed when this option is not set and an extra VFO
argument is not used.  See @command{chk_vfo} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Set verbose mode level, cumulative i.e.@: @option{-vvvvv} sets maximum
debugging output to @file{stderr}.

Five different levels of diagnostics can be output to @file{stderr}
and correspond to @option{-v} for @code{BUG}, @option{-vv} for
@code{ERR}, @option{-vvv} for @code{WARN}, @option{-vvvv} for
@code{VERBOSE}, or @option{-vvvvv} for @code{TRACE}.  Back end authors
will use the verbose facility to print critical values useful for
testing and will often ask for this output in response to a request
for help.

@item -Z
@itemx --debug_time_stamps
Enable time stamps on debug output.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Show summary of these options and exit.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -V
@itemx --version
Show version of @command{rigctl} and exit.

@end table

@quotation Note
Some options may not be implemented by a given backend and will return
an error.  This is most likely to occur with the @option{--set-conf}
and @option{--show-conf} options.
@end quotation

@node rigctld commands
@subsection @command{rigctld} commands
@cindex @command{rigctld} commands
@cindex commands, @command{rigctld}

Commands can be sent over the @acronym{TCP} socket either as a single
char, or as a long command name plus the value(s) space separated on
one @code{\n} terminated line.  @xref{rigctld protocol}.

Since most of the Hamlib operations have a ``set'' and a ``get''
method, in general an upper case letter will be used for set methods
whereas the corresponding lower case letter refers to the get method.
Each operation also has a long name; in interactive mode, prepend a
backslash @kbd{\} to enter a long command name.

Example (Perl):

@example
print $socket "\\dump_caps\n";
@end example

@noindent
to see what the radio's backend can do.

@quotation N.B.
In Perl and many other languages a @kbd{\} will need to
be escaped with a preceding @kbd{\} so that even though two backslash
characters appear in the code, only one will be passed to
@command{rigctld}.  This is a possible bug, so beware!
@end quotation

Be aware that the backend for the radio to be controlled, or the radio
itself may not support some commands. In that case, the operation will
fail with a Hamlib error message.

Here is a summary of the supported commands:

@itemize
@item
Command short name is followed by the long name which is followed by
any variable names.

@item
Some short commands are noted as hexadecimal digits due to the
limitation of upper and lower case letters available.  Use the
associated long command name instead.

@item
While a comma is used to separate variable names in this document,
they are not part of the command syntax used by @command{rigctl}.  Use
a space to separate values.

@item
In the case of ``set'' commands the variable @var{name} is replaced by
the value in the description.

@item
In the case of ``get'' commands the variable @var{name} is the key
name of the value returned.

@end itemize

@table @command
@item F, set_freq @var{Frequency}
Set @var{Frequency}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item f, get_freq
Get @var{Frequency}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item M, set_mode @var{Mode}, @var{Passband}
Set @var{Mode} to one of: @code{USB}, @code{LSB}, @code{CW},
@code{CWR}, @code{RTTY}, @code{RTTYR}, @code{AM}, @code{FM},
@code{WFM}, @code{AMS}, @code{PKTLSB}, @code{PKTUSB}, @code{PKTFM},
@code{ECSSUSB}, @code{ECSSLSB}, @code{FAX}, @code{SAM}, @code{SAL},
@code{SAH}, @code{DSB}.

Set @var{Passband} frequency in Hertz, or @code{0} for the Hamlib
backend default.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument
instead of @var{Mode} will return a space separated list of radio
backend supported Modes.  Use this to determine the supported Modes of
a given radio backend.

@item m, get_mode
Get @var{Mode}, @var{Passband}.

Returns Mode as a string from @command{set_mode} above and Passband
frequency in Hertz.

@item V, set_vfo @var{VFO}
Set @var{VFO} to one of: @code{VFOA}, @code{VFOB}, @code{VFOC},
@code{currVFO}, @code{VFO}, @code{MEM}, @code{Main}, @code{Sub},
@code{TX}, @code{RX}.

In @acronym{VFO} mode only a single @acronym{VFO} parameter is
required.

@item v, get_vfo
Get current @var{VFO}.

Returns @acronym{VFO} as a string from @command{set_vfo} above.

@item J, set_rit @var{RIT}
Set @var{RIT}, in Hertz, can be a positive or negative value.

A value of @code{0} resets @acronym{RIT} and @emph{should} turn
@acronym{RIT} off.  If not, file a bug report against the Hamlib
backend.

@strong{N.B.} This functionality is under transition and in the future
will need to be activated with the @command{set_func} command.

@item j, get_rit
Get @var{RIT}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item Z, set_xit @var{XIT}
Set @var{XIT}, in Hertz, can be a positive or negative value.

A value of @code{0} resets @acronym{XIT} and @emph{should} turn
@acronym{XIT} off.  If not, file a bug report against the Hamlib
backend.

@strong{N.B.} This functionality is under transition and in the future
will need to be activated with the @command{set_func} command.

@item z, get_xit
Get @var{XIT}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item T, set_ptt @var{PTT}
Set @var{PTT} to one of: @code{0} (RX), @code{1} (TX), @code{2} (TX
mic), @code{3} (TX data).
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item t, get_ptt
Get @var{PTT} status.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x8b, get_dcd
Get @var{DCD} (squelch) status, @code{0} (Closed) or @code{1} (Open)
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item R, set_rptr_shift @var{Rptr Shift}
Set @var{Rptr Shift}: @code{+}, @code{-} or something else for none.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item r, get_rptr_shift
Get @var{Rptr Shift}.  Returns @code{+}, @code{-} or @code{None}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item O, set_rptr_offs @var{Rptr Offset}
Set @var{Rptr Offset}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item o, get_rptr_offs
Get @var{Rptr Offset}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item C, set_ctcss_tone @var{CTCSS Tone}
Set @var{CTCSS Tone}, in tenths of Hertz.

@acronym{CTCSS},
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_Tone-Coded_Squelch_System,
Continuous Tone Coded Squelch System}, is a method used to reduce the
annoyance of listening to other users on a shared two-way
communications radio channel by imposing a tone on the transmitted
signal.  Also known as @dfn{subaudible tone} and @acronym{PL},
@dfn{Private Line}.

@item c, get_ctcss_tone
Get @var{CTCSS Tone}, in tenths of Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item D, set_dcs_code @var{DCS Code}
Set @var{DCS Code}.

@acronym{DCS},
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital-Coded_Squelch#DCS,
Digital-Coded Squelch} is a digital version of @acronym{CTCSS} which
imposes a digital code on the transmitted signal.

@item d, get_dcs_code
Get @var{DCS Code}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x90, set_ctcss_sql @var{CTCSS Sql}
Set @var{CTCSS Sql} tone, in tenths of Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x91, get_ctcss_sql
Get @var{CTCSS Sql} tone, in tenths of Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x92, set_dcs_sql @var{DCS Sql}
Set @var{DCS Sql} code.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x93, get_dcs_sql
Get @var{DCS Sql} code.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item I, set_split_freq @var{Tx Frequency}
Set @var{TX Frequency}, in Hertz for ``split'' frequency operation.

See also @command{set_split_freq_mode} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item i, get_split_freq
Get @var{TX Frequency}, in Hertz for ``split'' frequency operation.

See also @command{get_split_freq_mode} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item X, set_split_mode @var{TX Mode}, @var{TX Passband}
Set @var{TX Mode} to one of: @code{AM}, @code{FM}, @code{CW},
@code{CWR}, @code{USB}, @code{LSB}, @code{RTTY}, @code{RTTYR},
@code{WFM}, @code{AMS}, @code{PKTLSB}, @code{PKTUSB}, @code{PKTFM},
@code{ECSSUSB}, @code{ECSSLSB}, @code{FAX}, @code{SAM}, @code{SAL},
@code{SAH}, @code{DSB}.

The @var{TX Passband} is the exact passband frequency in Hertz, or
@code{0} for the Hamlib backend default. A value of @code{-1} may be
passed which leaves the rig passband unchanged from the current or
default value for the mode as defined by the rig.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{TX Mode} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported TX Modes.  Use this to determine the supported TX Modes of a
given radio backend.

See also @command{set_split_freq_mode} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item x, get_split_mode
Get @var{TX Mode}, @var{TX Passband}.

Returns TX mode as a string from @command{set_split_mode} above and TX
passband in Hz.

See also @command{get_split_freq_mode} below.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item K, set_split_freq_mode @var{Tx Frequency}, @var{TX Mode}, @var{TX Passband}
Set @var{TX Frequency}, in Hertz for ``split'' frequency operation.
Set @var{TX Mode} to one of: @code{AM}, @code{FM}, @code{CW},
@code{CWR}, @code{USB}, @code{LSB}, @code{RTTY}, @code{RTTYR},
@code{WFM}, @code{AMS}, @code{PKTLSB}, @code{PKTUSB}, @code{PKTFM},
@code{ECSSUSB}, @code{ECSSLSB}, @code{FAX}, @code{SAM}, @code{SAL},
@code{SAH}, @code{DSB}.

The @var{TX Passband} is the exact passband frequency in Hertz, or
@code{0} for the Hamlib backend default. A value of @code{-1} may be
passed which leaves the rig passband unchanged from the current or
default value for the mode as defined by the rig.

This is a convenience function that combines the effect of
@command{set_split_freq} and @command{set_split_mode}. It should be
used when both are required since it allows the back end to optimize
the operations. For example on many Icom rigs the current VFO must be
changed temporarily while executing these commands and that can
disrupt receive or transmit, using this function may minimize that
disruption.

See also @command{set_split_freq} and @command{set_split_mode} above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item k, get_split_freq_mode
Get @var{TX Frequency}, in Hertz for ``split'' frequency operation
along with the @var{TX Mode} as a string from @command{set_split_mode}
above and @var{TX Passband} in Hz.

This is a convenience function that combines the effect of
@command{get_split_freq} and @command{get_split_mode}. It should be
used when both are required since it allows the back end to optimize
the operations. For example on many Icom rigs the current VFO must be
changed temporarily while executing these commands and that can
disrupt receive or transmit, using this function may minimize that
disruption.

See also @command{get_split_freq} and @command{get_split_mode} above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item S, set_split_vfo @var{Split}, @var{TX VFO}
Set @var{Split} mode, @code{0} (off) or @code{1} (on), and @var{TX VFO}
from @command{set_vfo} above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item s, get_split_vfo
Get @var{Split} mode, @code{0} (off) or @code{1} (on), and @var{TX VFO}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item N, set_ts @var{Tuning Step}
Set @var{Tuning Step}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item n, get_ts
Get @var{Tuning Step}, in Hertz.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item U, set_func @var{Func}, @var{Func Status}
Set @var{Func}, @var{Func Status}.

@var{Func} is one of: @code{FAGC}, @code{NB}, @code{COMP}, @code{VOX},
@code{TONE}, @code{TSQL}, @code{SBKIN}, @code{FBKIN}, @code{ANF},
@code{NR}, @code{AIP}, @code{APF}, @code{MON}, @code{MN}, @code{RF},
@code{ARO}, @code{LOCK}, @code{MUTE}, @code{VSC}, @code{REV},
@code{SQL}, @code{ABM}, @code{BC}, @code{MBC}, @code{RIT}, @code{AFC},
@code{SATMODE}, @code{SCOPE}, @code{RESUME}, @code{TBURST},
@code{TUNER}, @code{XIT}.

Func Status argument is @code{1} for ``activate'', @code{0} for
``de-activate'', much as TRUE/FALSE definitions in the C/C++ languages
(true is non-zero and false is zero).

@strong{N.B.}  Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{Func} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``set'' functions.  Use this to determine the supported
functions of a given radio backend.

@item u, get_func @var{Func}
Get @var{Func Status}.

Returns @var{Func Status} as a non null value for the @var{Func} passed.
@var{Func} is a token from the list in @command{set_func} above.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{Func} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``get'' functions.  Use this to determine the supported
functions of a given radio backend.

@item L, set_level @var{Level}, @var{Level Value}
Set @var{Level}, @var{Level Value}.

@var{Level} is one of: @code{PREAMP}, @code{ATT}, @code{VOX}, @code{AF},
@code{RF}, @code{SQL}, @code{IF}, @code{APF}, @code{NR}, @code{PBT_IN},
@code{PBT_OUT}, @code{CWPITCH}, @code{RFPOWER}, @code{MICGAIN},
@code{KEYSPD}, @code{NOTCHF}, @code{COMP}, @code{AGC}(@code{0}:OFF,
@code{1}:SUPERFAST, @code{2}:FAST, @code{3}:SLOW, @code{4}:USER,
@code{5}:MEDIUM, @code{6}:AUTO), @code{BKINDL}, @code{BAL},
@code{METER}, @code{VOXGAIN}, @code{ANTIVOX}, @code{SLOPE_LOW},
@code{SLOPE_HIGH}, @code{RAWSTR}, @code{SWR}, @code{ALC},
@code{STRENGTH}.

The @var{Level Value} can be a float or an integer.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Level} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``set'' levels.  Use this to determine the supported levels of a
given radio backend.

@item l, get_level @var{Level}
Get @var{Level Value}.

Returns @var{Level Value} as a float or integer for the @var{Level}
passed.  @var{Level} is a token from the list in @command{set_level}
above.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Level} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``get'' levels.  Use this to determine the supported levels of a
given radio backend.

@item P, set_parm @var{Parm}, @var{Parm Value}
Set @var{Parm}, @var{Parm Value}

@var{Parm} is one of: @code{ANN}, @code{APO}, @code{BACKLIGHT},
@code{BEEP}, @code{TIME}, @code{BAT}, @code{KEYLIGHT}.

@strong{N.B.}  Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{Parm} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``set'' parameters.  Use this to determine the supported
parameters of a given radio backend.

@item p, get_parm @var{Parm}
Get @var{Parm Value}.

Returns @var{Parm Value} as a float or integer for the @var{Parm}
passed.  @var{Parm} is a token from the list in @command{set_parm}
above.

@strong{N.B.}  Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead
of @var{Parm} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``get'' parameters.  Use this to determine the supported
parameters of a given radio backend.

@item B, set_bank @var{Bank}
Set @var{Bank}.  Sets the current memory bank number.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item E, set_mem @var{Memory#}
Set @var{Memory#} channel number.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item e, get_mem
Get @var{Memory#} channel number.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item G, vfo_op @var{Mem/VFO Op}
Perform @var{Mem/VFO Op}.

@var{Mem/VFO Op}eration is one of: @code{CPY}, @code{XCHG},
@code{FROM_VFO}, @code{TO_VFO}, @code{MCL}, @code{UP}, @code{DOWN},
@code{BAND_UP}, @code{BAND_DOWN}, @code{LEFT}, @code{RIGHT},
@code{TUNE}, @code{TOGGLE}.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Mem/VFO Op} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported ``set'' Mem/VFO Ops.  Use this to determine the supported Mem/VFO
Ops of a given radio backend.

@item g, scan @var{Scan Fct}, @var{Scan Channel}
Perform @var{Scan Fct} @var{Scan Channel}.

Scan function/channel is one of: @code{STOP}, @code{MEM}, @code{SLCT},
@code{PRIO}, @code{PROG}, @code{DELTA}, @code{VFO}, @code{PLT}.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Scan Fct} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported Scan Functions.  Use this to determine the supported Scan
Functions of a given radio backend.

@item H, set_channel @var{Channel}
Set memory @var{Channel} data. Not implemented yet.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item h, get_channel
Get memory @var{Channel} data. Not implemented yet.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item A, set_trn @var{Transceive}
Set @var{Transceive} mode (reporting event): @code{OFF}, @code{RIG},
@code{POLL}.

@strong{N.B.} Passing a @kbd{?} (query) as the first argument instead of
@var{Transceive} will return a space separated list of radio backend
supported Scan Transceive modes.  Use this to determine the supported
Transceive modes of a given radio backend.

@item a, get_trn
Get @var{Transceive} mode (reporting event) as in @command{set_trn}
above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item Y, set_ant @var{Antenna}
Set @var{Antenna} number (@code{0}, @code{1}, @code{2}, @dots{}).
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item y, get_ant
Get @var{Antenna} number (@code{0}, @code{1}, @code{2}, @dots{}).
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item *, reset @var{Reset}
Perform rig @var{Reset}.

@code{0} = None, @code{1} = Software reset, @code{2} = @acronym{VFO}
reset, @code{4} = Memory Clear reset, @code{8} = Master reset.  Since
these values are defined as a bitmask in @file{rig.h}, it should be
possible to @code{AND} these values together to do multiple resets at
once, if the backend supports it or supports a reset action via rig
control at all.

@item b, send_morse @var{Morse}
Send @var{Morse} symbols.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x87, set_powerstat @var{Power Status}
Set power On/Off/Standby @var{Power Status}.

@code{0} = Power Off, @code{1} = Power On, @code{2} = Power Standby.
Defined as a bitmask in @file{rig.h}.

@item 0x88, get_powerstat
Get power On/Off/Standby @var{Power Status} as in
@command{set_powerstat} above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x89, send_dtmf @var{Digits}
Set DTMF @var{Digits}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item 0x8a, recv_dtmf
Get DTMF @var{Digits}.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item _, get_info
Get misc information about the rig

@acronym{VFO} parameter not used in '@acronym{VFO} mode'.

@item 1, dump_caps
Not a real rig remote command, it just dumps capabilities, i.e. what
the backend knows about this model, and what it can do.

TODO: Ensure this is in a consistent format so it can be read into a
hash, dictionary, etc.  Bug reports requested.

@strong{N.B.} This command will produce many lines of output so be
very careful if using a fixed length array!  For example, running this
command against the Dummy backend results in over 5kB of text output.

@acronym{VFO} parameter not used in '@acronym{VFO} mode'.

@item 2, power2mW @var{Power 0.0..1.0}, @var{Frequency}, @var{Mode}
Returns @var{Power mW}

Converts a @var{Power} value in a range of @code{0.0..1.0} to
the real transmit power in milli-Watts (integer).  The @var{Frequency}
and @var{Mode} also need to be provided as output power may vary
according to these values.

@acronym{VFO} parameter not used in '@acronym{VFO} mode'.

@item 4, mW2power @var{Power mW}, @var{Frequency}, @var{Mode}
Returns @var{Power 0.0..1.0}

Converts the real transmit power in milli-Watts (integer) to a
@var{Power} value in a range of @code{[0.0..1.0]}.  The
@var{Frequency} and @var{Mode} also need to be provided as output
power may vary according to these values.

@acronym{VFO} parameter not used in '@acronym{VFO} mode'.

@item w, send_cmd @var{Cmd}
Send raw command string to rig.  This is useful for testing and
troubleshooting rig commands and responses when developing a backend.

For binary protocols enter values as @code{\0xAA\0xBB}.  Expect a
@var{Reply} from the rig which will likely be a binary block or an
@acronym{ASCII} string depending on the rig's protocol (see your
radio's computer control documentation).

The command terminator, set by the @option{--send-cmd-term} option
above, will terminate each command string sent to the radio.  This
character should not be a part of the input string.

@item chk_vfo
Returns @code{CHKVFO 1} (single line only) if rigctld was invoked with
the @option{-o} or @option{--vfo} option, @code{CHKVFO 0} if not.

@end table

@node rigctld protocol
@subsection @command{rigctld} protocol
@cindex @command{rigctld} protocol
@cindex protocol, @command{rigctld}

Two protocols exist for communicating with @command{rigctld}.  The
``Default'' protocol is primarily used internally by Hamlib so an
application that is not written to use @command{rigctld} directly via
@acronym{TCP} network sockets can still access @command{rigctld}.  The
other ``Extended Response Protocol'' is intended for the more general
use case where a variety of response formats may be needed.


@menu
* rigctld Default protocol::
* rigctld Extended Response protocol::
@end menu

@node rigctld Default protocol
@subsubsection @command{rigctld} Default protocol
@cindex @command{rigctld} Default protocol
@cindex Default protocol, @command{rigctld}

The @command{rigctld} protocol is intentionally simple. Commands are
entered on a single line with any needed values.  In Perl, for exampl,
reliable results are obtained by terminating each command string with
a newline character, @samp{\n}.

@noindent
Example @code{set} (Perl code):

@example
print $socket "F 14250000\n";
print $socket "\\set_mode LSB 2400\n";   # escape leading '\'
@end example

@noindent
A one line response will be sent as a reply to @code{set} commands,
@samp{RPRT x\n} where @samp{x} is the Hamlib error code with @samp{0}
indicating success of the command.

@noindent
Responses from @command{rigctld} get commands are text values and
match the same tokens used in the @code{set} commands. Each value
is returned on its own line.  On error the string @samp{RPRT x\n} is
returned where @samp{x} is the Hamlib error code.

@noindent
Example @code{get} (Perl code):

@example
print $socket "f\n";
"14250000\n"
@end example

@noindent
Most @code{get} functions return one to three values. A notable
exception is the @command{dump_caps} command which returns many lines
of @samp{key:value} pairs.

This protocol is primarily used by the @code{NET rigctl}
(@command{rigctl} model 2) backend which allows applications already
written for Hamlib's C @acronym{API} to take advantage of
@command{rigctld} without the need of rewriting application code.  An
application's user can select rig model 2 (@code{NET rigctl}) and then
set @option{rig_pathname} to @kbd{localhost:4532} or other network
host:port (set by the @option{-t} option above).

@node rigctld Extended Response protocol
@subsubsection @command{rigctld} Extended Response Protocol
@cindex @command{rigctld} Extended Response Protocol
@cindex Extended Response Protocol, @command{rigctld}

An EXPERIMENTAL Extended Response protocol has been introduced into
@command{rigctld} as of February 16, 2010.  This protocol adds several
rules to the strings returned by @command{rigctld} and adds a rule for
the command syntax.

@enumerate
@item
The command received by @command{rigctld} is echoed with its long
command name followed by the value(s) (if any) received from the
client terminated by the specified response separator as the record
line of the response.

@item
The last line of each block is the string @samp{RPRT x\n} where
@samp{x} is the numeric return value of the Hamlib backend function
that was called by the command.

@item
Any records consisting of data values returned by the rig backend are
prepended by a string immediately followed by a colon then a space and
then the value terminated by the response
separator. e.g. @samp{Frequency: 14250000\n} when the command was
prepended by @code{+}.

@item
All commands received will be acknowledged by @command{rigctld} with
lines from rules 1 and 2.  Lines from rule 3 are only returned when
data values must be returned to the client.

@end enumerate

An example response to a @command{+\set_mode} command sent from the
shell prompt (note the prepended @code{+}):

@example
echo "+M USB 2400" | nc -w 1 localhost 4532
set_mode: USB 2400
RPRT 0
@end example

In this case the long command name and values are returned on the
first line and the second line contains the end of block marker and
the numeric rig backend return value indicating success.

An example response to a @command{\get_mode} query:

@example
echo "+\get_mode" | nc -w 1 localhost 4532
get_mode:
Mode: USB
Passband: 2400
RPRT 0
@end example

In this case, as no value is passed to @command{rigctld}, the first
line consists only of the long command name.  The final line shows
that the command was processed successfully by the rig backend.

Invoking the Extended Response protocol requires prepending a command
with a punctuation character.  As shown in the examples above,
prepending a '@code{+} character to the command results in the
responses being separated by a newline character (@samp{\n}).  Any
other punctuation character recognized by the C @code{ispunct()}
function except @code{\}, @code{?}, or @code{_} will cause that
character to become the response separator and the entire response
will be on one line.

Separator character summary:

@table @code
@item +
Each record of the response is appended with a newline (@samp{\n}).
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item ;, |, or ,
Each record of the response is appended by the given character
resulting in entire response on one line.

Common record separators for text representations of spreadsheet data,
etc.

@item ?
Reserved for 'help' in @command{rigctl} short command.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item _
Reserved for @command{\get_info} in @command{rigctl} short command.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item #
Reserved for comments when reading a command file script.

@end table

Other punctuation characters have not been tested!  Use at your own
risk.

For example, invoking a @command{;\get_mode} query with a leading
@code{;} returns:

@example
get_mode:;Mode: USB;Passband: 2400;RPRT 0
@end example

Or, using the vertical bar (pipe) character @code{|} returns:

@example
get_mode:|Mode: USB|Passband: 2400|RPRT 0
@end example

And a @command{\set_mode} command prepended with a @code{|} returns:

@example
set_mode: USB 2400|RPRT 0
@end example

Such a format will allow reading a response as a single event using a
preferred response separator.  Other punctuation characters have not
been tested!


@node rotctld
@section @command{rotctld}
@cindex rotctld

The @command{rotctld} program is a network server that accepts the
familiar commands of @command{rotctl} and provides the response data
over a @acronym{TCP/IP} network socket to an application.  In this
manner an application can access a @command{rotctl} instance from
nearly anywhere (caveat, no security is currently provided by
@command{rotctl}).  Applications using @command{rotctl} do not link to
Hamlib nor use its C API.

@menu
* Introduction to rotctld::
* rotctld invocation::
* rotctld command line options::
* rotctld commands::
* rotctld protocol::
@end menu

@node Introduction to rotctld
@subsection Introduction to @command{rotctld}
@cindex Introduction to @command{rotctld}
@cindex @command{rotctld}, introduction to

@command{rotctld} communicates to a client through a @acronym{TCP}
socket using text commands shared with @command{rotctl}. The protocol
is simple, commands are sent to @command{rotctld} on one line and
@command{rotctld} responds to ``get'' commands with the requested
values, one per line, when successful, otherwise, it responds with one
line @samp{RPRT x}, where @samp{x} is a negative number indicating the
error code.  Commands that do not return values respond with the line
@samp{RPRT x}, where @samp{x} is zero when successful, otherwise is a
regative number indicating the error code.  Each line is terminated
with a newline @code{\n} character.  This protocol is primarily for
use by the @code{NET rotctl} (rot model 2) backend.  @xref{rotctld
Default protocol}.

A separate Extended Response protocol extends the above behavior by
echoing the received command string as a header, any returned values
as a key: value pair, and the @samp{RPRT x} string as the end of
response marker which includes the Hamlib success or failure value.
Consider using this protocol for clients that will interact with
@command{rotctld} directly through a @acronym{TCP} network socket.
@xref{rotctld Extended Response protocol}.

@node rotctld invocation
@subsection @command{rotctld} invocation
@cindex @command{rotctld} invocation
@cindex invocation, @command{rotctld}

The command line invocation for @command{rotctld} is similar to
@command{rotctl} except that in POSIX environments a trailing @kbd{&}
is appended to the command string to ``background'' the
@command{rotctld} process so the shell can be used to run other
commands while @command{rotctld} continues to run.

Here are some examples for invoking @command{rotctld}.

Start @command{rotctld} for a Ham IV rotor with the RotorEZ installed
using a USB-to-serial adapter and backgrounding:

@example
rotctld -m 401 -r /dev/ttyUSB1 &
@end example

Start @command{rotctld} for RotorEZ using @code{COM2} on MS Windows:

@example
rotctl -m 401 -r COM2 -T 127.0.0.1 -t 4533
@end example

@quotation Note
On MS Windows the use of the @option{-T} and @option{-t} options appear
to be necessary to set the @acronym{IP} address and @acronym{TCP} port
or else the network socket cannot be found.  On @acronym{POSIX} systems
the @command{rotctld} default values will be used.
@end quotation

Connect to the already running rotctld, and set position to 135.0
degrees azimuth and 30.0 degrees elevation with a 1 second read
timeout from the shell prompt:

@example
echo "\set_pos 135.0 30.0" | nc -w 1 localhost 4533
@end example

Connect to a running @command{rotctld} with @command{rotctl} on the
local host:

@example
rotctl -m2
@end example

@node rotctld command line options
@subsection @command{rotctld} command line options
@cindex @command{rotctld} command line options
@cindex Command line options, @command{rotctld}

Many of the @command{rotctld} command line options are shared
with @command{rotctl} with a few additions.

@command{rotctld} accepts the following options:

@table @option
@item -m
@itemx --model=@var{id}
Select rotator model number. See model list (use @kbd{rotctl -l}).

@strong{N.B.} @command{rotctl} (or third party software) will use
rotor model 2 for NET rotctl (@command{rotctld}).

@item -r
@itemx --rot-file=@var{device}
Use @var{device} as the file name of the port the rotor is connected.
Often a serial port, but could be a USB to serial adapter.  Typically
@file{/dev/ttyS0} , @file{/dev/ttyS1} , @file{/dev/ttyUSB0} , etc.@:
on Linux or @file{COM1} , @file{COM2} , etc.@: on MS Windows.  The
special string @kbd{uh-rig} may be given to enable micro-ham device
support.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -s
@itemx --serial-speed=@var{baud}
Set serial speed to @var{baud} rate. Uses @strong{maximum} serial
speed from rotor backend capabilities as the default.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -T
@itemx --listen-addr=@var{IPADDR}
Use @var{IPADDR} as the listening @acronym{IP} address. The default is ANY.

@strong{N.B.} On MS Windows setting a specific @acronym{IP} address is
likely necessary.

@item -t
@itemx --port=@var{number}
Use @var{number} as the @acronym{TCP} listening port. The default is
@code{4533}.

@strong{N.B.} As @command{rigctld}'s default port is @code{4532}, it
is advisable to use odd numbered ports for @command{rotctld}, e.g.
@code{4533}, @code{4535}, @code{4537}, etc.

@item -L
@itemx --show-conf
List all config parameters for the rotor defined with @option{-m}
above.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -C
@itemx --set-conf=@var{parm}=@var{val}[,@var{parm}=@var{val},@dots{}]
Set config parameter. e.g.@: @code{stop_bits=2}

Use @option{-L} option for a list.

@item -l
@itemx --list
List all model numbers defined in Hamlib and exit.  As of 1.2.15.1 the
list is sorted by model number.

@strong{N.B.} In Linux the list can be scrolled back using
@kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageUp}/ @kbd{@key{SHIFT}-PageDown}, or using the
scrollbars of a virtual terminal in X or the @command{cmd} window in
MS Windows.  The output can be piped to '@command{more}' or
'@command{less}', e.g.@: '@kbd{rotctl -l | more}'.

@item -u
@itemx --dump-caps
Dump capabilities for the rotor defined with @option{-m} above and
exit.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Set verbose mode level, cumulative i.e.@: @option{-vvvvv} sets maximum
debugging output to @file{stderr}.

Five different levels of diagnostics can be output to @file{stderr}
and correspond to @option{-v} for @code{BUG}, @option{-vv} for
@code{ERR}, @option{-vvv} for @code{WARN}, @option{-vvvv} for
@code{VERBOSE}, or @option{-vvvvv} for @code{TRACE}.  Back end authors
will use the verbose facility to print critical values useful for
testing and will often ask for this output in response to a request
for help.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Show summary of these options and exit.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item -V
@itemx --version
Show version of @command{rotctl} and exit.
@end table

@quotation Note
Some options may not be implemented by a given backend and will return
an error.  This is most likely to occur with the @option{--set-conf}
and @option{--show-conf} options.
@end quotation

@node rotctld commands
@subsection @command{rotctld} commands
@cindex @command{rotctld} commands
@cindex commands, @command{rotctld}

Commands can be sent over the @acronym{TCP} socket either as a single
char, or as a long command name plus the value(s) space separated on
one @code{\n} terminated line.  @xref{rotctld protocol}.

Since most of the Hamlib operations have a ``set'' and a ``get''
method, in general an upper case letter will be used for set methods
whereas the corresponding lower case letter refers to the get method.
Each operation also has a long name; in interactive mode, prepend a
backslash @kbd{\} to enter a long command name.

Example (Perl):

@example
print $socket "\\dump_caps\n";
@end example

@noindent
to see what the rotor's backend can do.

@quotation N.B.
In Perl and many other languages a @kbd{\} will need to
be escaped with a preceding @kbd{\} so that even though two backslash
characters appear in the code, only one will be passed to
@command{rotctld}.  This is a possible bug, so beware!
@end quotation

Be aware that the backend for the rotor to be controlled, or the rotor
itself may not support some commands. In that case, the operation will
fail with a Hamlib error message.

@strong{Rotor commands}

Here is a summary of the supported commands:

@table @command
@itemize
@item
Command short name is followed by the long name which is followed by
any variable names.

@item
While a comma is used to separate variable names in this document,
they are not part of the command syntax used by @command{rotctl}.  Use
a space to separate values.

@item
In the case of ``set'' commands the variable @var{name} is replaced by
the value in the description.

@item
In the case of ``get'' commands the variable @var{name} is the key
name of the value returned.

@end itemize

@item P, set_pos @var{Azimuth}, @var{Elevation}
Set position: @var{Azimuth} and @var{Elevation} as double precision
floating point values.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item p, get_pos
Get position: @var{Azimuth} and @var{Elevation} as double precision
floating point values.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item M, move @var{Direction}, @var{Speed}
Move the rotator in a specific direction at the given rate.

Values are integers where @var{Direction} is defined as @code{2} = Up,
@code{4} = Down, @code{8} = Left, and @code{16} = Right.  @var{Speed}
is an integer between @code{1} and @code{100}.

@strong{N.B.} Not all backends that implement the move command use the
Speed value.  At this time only the gs232a utilizes the Speed
parameter.

@item S, stop
Stop the rotator.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item K, park
Park the antenna.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item C, set_conf @var{Token}, @var{Value}
Set a configuration parameter.  It is safe to give @var{Token} a value
of @code{0} (zero).  @var{Value} may be a string up to 20 characters.

See @option{-L} output.

@item R, reset @var{Reset}
Reset the rotator.

Integer value of @code{1} for Reset All.

@item _, get_info
Get misc information on the rotator.

At the moment returns @var{Model Name}.

@item w, send_cmd @var{Cmd}
Send raw command string to the rotator.

@code{<CR>} (or @option{send-cmd-term}, see @option{-t} option) is
appended automatically at the end of the command for text protocols.
For binary protocols, enter values as @code{\0xAA\0xBB}.
@end table

@strong{Locator Commands}

These commands offer conversions of Degrees Minutes Seconds to other
formats, Maidenhead square locator conversions and distance and
azimuth conversions.

@table @command
@item L, lonlat2loc @var{Longitude}, @var{Latitude}, @var{Loc Len 2..12}
Returns the Maidenhead locator for the given @var{Longitude} and
@var{Latitude}.

Both are floating point values.  The precision of the returned square
is controlled by @var{Loc Len} which should be an even numbered
integer value between @code{2} and @code{12}.

For example, @kbd{+L -170.000000 -85.000000 12\n} returns
@samp{Locator: AA55AA00AA00\n}.

@item l, loc2lonlat @var{Locator}
Returns @var{Longitude} and @var{Latitude} in decimal degrees at the
approximate center of the requested grid square (despite the use of
double precision variables internally, some rounding error occurs).
West longitude is expressed as a negative value.  South latitude is
expressed as a negative value.  Locator can be from 2 to 12 characters
in length.

For example, @kbd{+l AA55AA00AA00} returns @samp{Longitude:
-169.999983\nLatitude: -84.999991\n}.

@item D, dms2dec @var{Degrees}, @var{Minutes}, @var{Seconds}, @var{S/W}
Returns @var{Dec Degrees}, a signed floating point value.

@var{Degrees} and @var{Minutes} are integer values and @var{Seconds}
is a floating point value.  @var{S/W} is a flag with @code{1}
indicating South latitude or West longitude and @code{0} North or East
(the flag is needed as computers don't recognize a signed zero even
though only the @var{Degrees} value only is typically signed in
@acronym{DMS} notation).

@item d, dec2dms @var{Dec Degrees}
Returns @var{Degrees}, @var{Minutes}, @var{Seconds}, @var{S/W}.

Values are as in @command{dms2dec} above.

@item E, dmmm2dec @var{Degrees}, @var{Dec Minutes}, @var{S/W}
Returns @var{Dec Degrees}, a signed floating point value.

@var{Degrees} is an integer value and @var{Minutes} is a floating
point value.  @var{S/W} is a flag with @code{1} indicating South
latitude or West longitude and @code{0} North or East (the flag is
needed as computers don't recognize a signed zero even though only the
@var{Degrees} value only is typically signed in @acronym{DMS}
notation).

@item e, dec2dmmm @var{Dec Deg}
Returns @var{Degrees}, @var{Minutes}, @var{S/W}.

Values are as in @command{dmmm2dec} above.

@item B, qrb @var{Lon 1}, @var{Lat 1}, @var{Lon 2}, @var{Lat 2}
Returns @var{Distance} and @var{Azimuth} where @var{Distance} is in km
and @var{Azimuth} is in degrees.

All @var{Lon}/@var{Lat} values are signed floating point numbers.

@item A, a_sp2a_lp @var{Short Path Deg}
Returns @var{Long Path Deg} or @code{-RIG_EINVAL} upon input error.

Both are floating point values within the range @code{0.00} to
@var{360.00}.

@item a, d_sp2d_lp @var{Short Path km}
Returns @var{Long Path km}.

Both are floating point values.
@end table


@node rotctld protocol
@subsection @command{rotctld} protocol
@cindex @command{rotctld} protocol
@cindex protocol, @command{rotctld}

Two protocols exist for communicating with @command{rotctld}.  The
``Default'' protocol is primarily used internally by Hamlib so an
application that is not written to use @command{rotctld} directly via
@acronym{TCP} network sockets can still access @command{rotctld}.  The
other ``Extended Response Protocol'' is intended for the more general
use case where a variety of response formats may be needed.


@menu
* rotctld Default protocol::
* rotctld Extended Response protocol::
@end menu

@node rotctld Default protocol
@subsubsection @command{rotctld} Default protocol
@cindex @command{rotctld} Default protocol
@cindex Default protocol, @command{rotctld}

The @command{rotctld} protocol is intentionally simple. Commands are
entered on a single line with any needed values.  In Perl, for exampl,
reliable results are obtained by terminating each command string with
a newline character, @samp{\n}.

@noindent
Example @code{set} (Perl code):

@example
print $socket "P 135 10\n";
print $socket "\\set_pos 135 10\n";   # escape leading '\'
@end example

@noindent
A one line response will be sent as a reply to @code{set} commands,
@samp{RPRT x\n} where @samp{x} is the Hamlib error code with @samp{0}
indicating success of the command.

@noindent
Responses from @command{rotctld} get commands are text values and
match the same tokens used in the @code{set} commands. Each value
is returned on its own line.  On error the string @samp{RPRT x\n} is
returned where @samp{x} is the Hamlib error code.

@noindent
Example @code{get} (Perl code):

@example
print $socket "p\n";
"135"
"10"
@end example

@noindent
Most @code{get} functions return one to four values. A notable
exception is the @command{dump_caps} command which returns many lines
of @samp{key:value} pairs.

This protocol is primarily used by the @code{NET rotctl}
(@command{rotctl} model 2) backend which allows applications already
written for Hamlib's C @acronym{API} to take advantage of
@command{rotctld} without the need of rewriting application code.  An
application's user can select rotor model 2 (@code{NET rotctl}) and then
set @option{rig_pathname} to @kbd{localhost:4533} or other network
host:port (set by the @option{-t} option above).

@node rotctld Extended Response protocol
@subsubsection @command{rotctld} Extended Response Protocol
@cindex @command{rotctld} Extended Response Protocol
@cindex Extended Response Protocol, @command{rotctld}

An EXPERIMENTAL Extended Response protocol has been introduced into
@command{rotctld} as of February 10, 2010.  This protocol adds several
rules to the strings returned by @command{rotctld} and adds a rule for
the command syntax.

@enumerate
@item
The command received by @command{rotctld} is echoed with its long
command name followed by the value(s) (if any) received from the
client terminated by the specified response separator as the record
line of the response.

@item
The last line of each block is the string @samp{RPRT x\n} where
@samp{x} is the numeric return value of the Hamlib backend function
that was called by the command.

@item
Any records consisting of data values returned by the rotor backend are
prepended by a string immediately followed by a colon then a space and
then the value terminated by the response
separator. e.g. @samp{Azimuth: 90.000000\n} when the command was
prepended by @code{+}.

@item
All commands received will be acknowledged by @command{rotctld} with
lines from rules 1 and 2.  Lines from rule 3 are only returned when
data values must be returned to the client.

@end enumerate

An example response to a @command{+P} command sent from the
shell prompt (note the prepended @code{+}):

@example
echo "+P 90 45" | nc -w 1 localhost 4533
set_pos: 90 45
RPRT 0
@end example

In this case the long command name and values are returned on the
first line and the second line contains the end of block marker and
the numeric rotor backend return value indicating success.

An example response to a @command{+\get_pos} query:

@example
echo "+\get_pos" | nc -w 1 localhost 4533
get_pos:
Azimuth: 90.000000
Elevation: 45.000000
RPRT 0
@end example

In this case, as no value is passed to @command{rotctld}, the first
line consists only of the long command name.  The final line shows
that the command was processed successfully by the rig backend.

Invoking the Extended Response protocol requires prepending a command
with a punctuation character.  As shown in the examples above,
prepending a '@code{+} character to the command results in the
responses being separated by a newline character (@samp{\n}).  Any
other punctuation character recognized by the C @code{ispunct()}
function except @code{\}, @code{?}, or @code{_} will cause that
character to become the response separator and the entire response
will be on one line.

Separator character summary:

@table @code
@item +
Each record of the response is appended with a newline (@samp{\n}).
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item ;, |, or ,
Each record of the response is appended by the given character
resulting in entire response on one line.

Common record separators for text representations of spreadsheet data,
etc.

@item ?
Reserved for 'help' in @command{rotctl} short command.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item _
Reserved for @command{\get_info} in @command{rotctl} short command.
@ifhtml
@*
@end ifhtml

@item #
Reserved for comments when reading a command file script.

@end table

Other punctuation characters have not been tested!  Use at your own
risk.

For example, invoking a @command{;\get_pos} query with a leading
@code{;} returns:

@example
get_pos:;Azimuth: 90.000000;Elevation: 45.000000;RPRT 0
@end example

Or, using the vertical bar (pipe) character @code{|} returns:

@example
get_pos:|Azimuth: 90.000000|Elevation: 45.000000|RPRT 0
@end example

And a @command{\set_pos} command prepended with a @code{|} returns:

@example
set_pos: 135 22.5|RPRT 0
@end example

Such a format will allow reading a response as a single event using a
preferred response separator.  Other punctuation characters have not
been tested!

All commands with the exception of @command{\set_conf} have been
tested with the Extended Response protocol and the included
@file{testrotctld.pl} script.
