.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For layout and available macros, see man(7), man-pages(7), groff_man(7)
.\" Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Note: Please keep this page in sync with the source, rigctl.c
.\"
.TH RIGCTL "1" "2020-09-09" "Hamlib" "Hamlib Utilities"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
rigctl \- control radio transceivers and receivers
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.
.SY rigctl
.OP \-hiIlLnouV
.OP \-m id
.OP \-r device
.OP \-p device
.OP \-d device
.OP \-P type
.OP \-D type
.OP \-s baud
.OP \-c id
.OP \-t char
.OP \-C parm=val
.RB \-Y
.RB [ \-v [ \-Z ]]
.RB [ command | \- ]
.YS
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Control radio transceivers and receivers.
.B rigctl
accepts
.B commands
from the command line as well as in interactive mode if none are provided on
the command line.
.
.PP
Keep in mind that Hamlib is BETA level software.  While a lot of backend
libraries lack complete rig support, the basic functions are usually well
supported.
.
.PP
Please report bugs and provide feedback at the e-mail address given in the
.B BUGS
section below.  Patches and code enhancements sent to the same address are
welcome.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax.  Short options that
take an argument may have the value follow immediately or be separated by a
space.  Long options starting with two dashes (\(oq\-\(cq) require an
\(oq=\(cq between the option and any argument.
.
.PP
Here is a summary of the supported options:
.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-model = \fIid\fP
Select radio model number. Defaults to dummy rig.
.IP
See model list (use \(lqrigctl -l\(rq).
.IP
.BR Note :
.B rigctl
(or third party software using the C API) will use radio model 2 for
.B NET rigctl
(communicating with
.BR rigctld ).
.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rig\-file = \fIdevice\fP
Use
.I device
as the file name of the port connected to the radio.
.IP
Often a serial port, but could be a USB to serial adapter.  Typically
.IR /dev/ttyS0 ", " /dev/ttyS1 ", " /dev/ttyUSB0 ,
etc. on Linux,
.IR COM1 ", " COM2 ,
etc. on MS Windows.  The BSD flavors and Mac OS/X have their own designations.
See your system's documentation.
.IP
Can be a network address:port, e.g. 127.0.0.1:12345
.IP
The special string \(lquh\-rig\(rq may be given to enable micro-ham device
support.
.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-ptt\-file = \fIdevice\fP
Use
.I device
as the file name of the Push-To-Talk device using a device file as described
above.
.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-dcd\-file = \fIdevice\fP
Use
.I device
as the file name of the Data Carrier Detect device using a device file as
described above.
.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-ptt\-type = \fItype\fP
Use
.I type
of Push-To-Talk device.
.IP
Supported types are \(oqRIG\(cq (CAT command), \(oqDTR\(cq, \(oqRTS\(cq,
\(oqPARALLEL\(cq, \(oqCM108\(cq, \(oqGPIO\(cq, \(oqGPION\(cq, \(oqNONE\(cq, overriding PTT type defined in the rig's
backend.
.IP
Some side effects of this command are that when type is set to DTR, read
PTT state comes from the
.B Hamlib
frontend, not read from the radio.  When set to NONE, PTT state cannot be read
or set even if rig backend supports reading/setting PTT status from the rig.
.
.TP
.BR \-D ", " \-\-dcd\-type = \fItype\fP
Use
.I type
of Data Carrier Detect device.
.IP
Supported types are \(oqRIG\(cq (CAT command), \(oqDSR\(cq, \(oqCTS\(cq,
\(oqCD\(cq, \(oqPARALLEL\(cq, \(oqCM108\(cq, \(oqGPIO\(cq, \(oqGPION\(cq, \(oqNONE\(cq.
.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-serial\-speed = \fIbaud\fP
Set serial speed to
.I baud
rate.
.IP
Uses maximum serial speed from radio backend capabilities (set by
.B -m
above) as the default.
.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-civaddr = \fIid\fP
Use
.I id
as the CI-V address to communicate with the rig.
.IP
Only useful for Icom and some Ten-Tec rigs.
.IP
.BR Note :
The
.I id
is in decimal notation, unless prefixed by
.IR 0x ,
in which case it is hexadecimal.
.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-send\-cmd\-term = \fIchar\fP
Change the termination
.I char
for text protocol when using the
.B send_cmd
command.
.IP
The default value is ASCII CR (\(oq0x0D\(cq).  ASCII non-printing characters
can be given as the ASCII number in hexadecimal format prepended with
\(lq0x\(rq.  You may pass an empty string for no termination char.  The string
\(lq\-1\(rq tells
.B rigctl
to switch to binary protocol.  See the
.B send_cmd
command for further explanation.
.IP
For example, to specify a command terminator for Kenwood style text commands
pass \(lq-t ';'\(rq to rigctl.  See
.B EXAMPLE
below.
.
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-show\-conf
List all config parameters for the radio defined with
.B \-m
above. Note the dummy device has no serial parameters.
.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-set\-conf = \fIparm=val\fP [ \fI,parm=val\fP ]
Set radio configuration parameter(s), e.g.
.IR stop_bits=2 .
.IP
Use the
.B -L
option above for a list of configuration parameters for a given model number.
.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-dump\-caps
Dump capabilities for the radio defined with
.B -m
above and exit.
.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List all model numbers defined in
.B Hamlib
and exit.
.IP
The list is sorted by model number.
.IP
.BR Note :
In Linux the list can be scrolled back using
.BR Shift-PageUp / Shift-PageDown ,
or using the scrollbars of a virtual terminal in X or the cmd window in
Windows.  The output can be piped to
.BR more (1)
or
.BR less (1),
e.g. \(lqrigctl -l | more\(rq.
.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-vfo
Enable vfo mode.
.IP
An extra VFO argument will be required in front of each appropriate command
(except
.BR set_vfo ).
Otherwise, \(oqcurrVFO\(cq is used when this option is not set and an extra
VFO argument is not used.
.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-restore\-ai
On exit
.B rigctl
restores the state of auto information (AI) on the controlled rig.
.IP
If this is not desired, for example if you are using
.B rigctl
to turn AI mode on or off, pass this option.
.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-read\-history
Read previously saved command and argument history from a file (default
.IR $HOME/.rigctl_history )
for the current session.
.IP
Available when
.B rigctl
is built with Readline support (see READLINE below).
.IP
.BR Note :
To read a history file stored in another directory, set the
.B RIGCTL_HIST_DIR
environment variable, e.g. \(lqRIGCTL_HIST_DIR=~/tmp rigctl -i\(rq.  When
RIGCTL_HIST_DIR is not set, the value of
.B HOME
is used.
.
.TP
.BR \-I ", " \-\-save\-history
Write current session (and previous session(s), if
.B -i
option is given) command and argument history to a file (default
.IR $HOME/.rigctl_history )
at the end of the current session.
.IP
Complete commands with arguments are saved as a single line to be recalled and
used or edited.  Available when
.B rigctl
is built with Readline support (see
.B READLINE
below).
.IP
.BR Note :
To write a history file in another directory, set the
.B RIGCTL_HIST_DIR
environment variable, e.g. \(lqRIGCTL_HIST_DIR=~/tmp rigctl -I\)Rq.  When
RIGCTL_HIST_DIR is not set, the value of
.B HOME
is used.
.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Set verbose mode, cumulative (see
.B DIAGNOSTICS
below).
.TP
.BR \-Y "," \-\-\ignore\-err
Ignores rig open errors
.
.TP
.BR \-Z ", " \-\-debug\-time\-stamps
Enable time stamps for the debug messages.
.IP
Use only in combination with the
.B -v
option as it generates no output on its own.
.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a summary of these options and exit.
.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version of
.B rigctl
and exit.
.
.TP
.B \-
Stop option processing and read commands from standard input.
.IP
See
.B Standard Input
below.
.
.PP
.BR Note :
Some options may not be implemented by a given backend and will return an
error.  This is most likely to occur with the
.B \-\-set\-conf
and
.B \-\-show\-conf
options.
.
.PP
Please note that the backend for the radio to be controlled, or the radio
itself may not support some commands.  In that case, the operation will fail
with a
.B Hamlib
error code.
.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.
Commands can be entered either as a single char, or as a long command name.
The commands are not prefixed with a dash as the options are.  They may be
typed in when in interactive mode or provided as argument(s) in command line
interface mode.  In interactive mode commands and their arguments may be
entered on a single line:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.B M LSB 2400
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Since most of the
.B Hamlib
operations have a
.BR set " and a " get
method, a single upper case letter will often be used for a
.B set
method whereas the corresponding single lower case letter refers to the
.B get
method.  Each operation also has a long name; in interactive mode, prepend a
backslash, \(oq\\\(cq, to enter a long command name all lower case.
.
.PP
Example: Use \(lq\\dump_caps\(rq to see what capabilities this radio and
backend support.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
The backend for the radio to be controlled, or the radio itself may not
support some commands. In that case, the operation will fail with a
.B Hamlib
error message.
.
.
.SS Standard Input
.
As an alternative to the
.B READLINE
interactive command entry or a single command for each run,
.B rigctl
features a special option where a single dash (\(oq\-\(cq) may be used to read
commands from standard input
.RB ( stdin ).
Commands must be separated by whitespace similar to the commands given on the
command line.  Comments may be added using the \(oq#\(cq character, all text
up until the end of the current line including the \(oq#\(cq character is
ignored.
.
.PP
A simple example (typed text is in bold):
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " cat <<.EOF. >cmds.txt"
.RB > " # File of commands"
.RB > " v f m	# query rig"
.RB > " V VFOB F 14200000 M CW 500	# set rig"
.RB > " v f m	# query rig"
.RB > " .EOF."

.RB $ " rigctl -m1 - <cmds.txt"

v VFOA

f 145000000

m FM
15000

V VFOB
F 14200000
M CW 500
v VFOB

f 14200000

m CW
500

$
.EE
.in
.
.
.SS rigctl Commands
.
A summary of commands is included below (In the case of
.B set
commands the quoted italicized string is replaced by the value in the
description.  In the case of
.B get
commands the quoted italicized string is the key name of the value returned.):
.
.TP
.BR Q | q ", exit rigctl"
Exit rigctl in interactive mode.
.IP
When rigctl is controlling the rig directly, will close the rig backend and
port.  When rigctl is connected to rigctld (radio model 2), the TCP/IP
connection to rigctld is closed and rigctld remains running, available for
another TCP/IP network connection.
.
.TP
.BR F ", " set_freq " \(aq" \fIFrequency\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Frequency \(aq,
in Hz.
.IP
Frequency may be a floating point or integer value.
.
.TP
.BR f ", " get_freq
Get
.RI \(aq Frequency \(aq,
in Hz.
.IP
Returns an integer value and the VFO hamlib thinks is active.
Note that some rigs (e.g. all Icoms) cannot track current VFO so hamlib can
get out of sync with the rig if the user presses rig buttons like the VFO.
.
.TP
.BR M ", " set_mode " \(aq" \fIMode\fP "\(aq \(aq" \fIPassband\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Mode \(aq
and
.RI \(aq Passband \(aq.
.IP
Mode is a token: \(oqUSB\(cq, \(oqLSB\(cq, \(oqCW\(cq, \(oqCWR\(cq,
\(oqRTTY\(cq, \(oqRTTYR\(cq, \(oqAM\(cq, \(oqFM\(cq, \(oqWFM\(cq, \(oqAMS\(cq,
\(oqPKTLSB\(cq, \(oqPKTUSB\(cq, \(oqPKTFM\(cq, \(oqECSSUSB\(cq,
\(oqECSSLSB\(cq, \(oqFA\(cq, \(oqSAM\(cq, \(oqSAL\(cq, \(oqSAH\(cq,
\(oqDSB\(cq.
.IP
Passband is in Hz as an integer, -1 for no change, or \(oq0\(cq for the radio backend default.
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Mode token will
return a space separated list of radio backend supported Modes.  Use this to
determine the supported Modes of a given radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR m ", " get_mode
Get
.RI \(aq Mode \(aq
and
.RI \(aq Passband \(aq.
.IP
Returns Mode as a token and Passband in Hz as in
.B set_mode
above.
.
.TP
.BR V ", " set_vfo " \(aq" \fIVFO\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq VFO \(aq.
.IP
VFO is a token: \(oqVFOA\(cq, \(oqVFOB\(cq, \(oqVFOC\(cq, \(oqcurrVFO\(cq,
\(oqVFO\(cq, \(oqMEM\(cq, \(oqMain\(cq, \(oqSub\(cq, \(oqTX\(cq, \(oqRX\(cq.
.IP
In VFO mode (see
.B \-\-vfo
option above) only a single VFO parameter is required:
.
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " rigctl -m 229 -r /dev/rig -o"

Rig command: V
VFO: VFOB

Rig command:
.EE
.in
.
.TP
.BR v ", " get_vfo
Get current
.RI \(aq VFO \(aq.
.IP
Returns VFO as a token as in
.B set_vfo
above.
.
.TP
.BR J ", " set_rit " \(aq" \fIRIT\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq RIT \(aq.
.IP
RIT is in Hz and can be + or -.  A value of \(oq0\(cq resets RIT (Receiver
Incremental Tuning) to match the VFO frequency.
.IP
.BR Note :
RIT needs to be explicitly activated or deactivated with the
.B set_func
command.  This allows setting the RIT offset independently of its activation
and allows RIT to remain active while setting the offset to \(oq0\(cq.
.
.TP
.BR j ", " get_rit
Get
.RI \(aq RIT \(aq
in Hz.
.IP
Returned value is an integer.
.
.TP
.BR Z ", " set_xit " \(aq" \fIXIT\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq XIT \(aq.
.IP
XIT is in Hz and can be + or -.  A value of \(oq0\(cq resets XIT (Transmitter
Incremental Tuning) to match the VFO frequency.
.IP
.BR Note :
XIT needs to be explicitly activated or deactivated with the
.B set_func
command.  This allows setting the XIT offset independently of its activation
and allows XIT to remain active while setting the offset to \(oq0\(cq.
.
.TP
.BR z ", " get_xit
Get
.RI \(aq XIT \(aq
in Hz.
.IP
Returned value is an integer.
.
.TP
.BR T ", " set_ptt " \(aq" \fIPTT\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq PTT \(aq.
.IP
PTT is a value: \(oq0\(cq (RX), \(oq1\(cq (TX), \(oq2\(cq (TX mic), or
\(oq3\(cq (TX data).
.
.TP
.BR t ", " get_ptt
Get
.RI \(aq PTT \(aq
status.
.IP
Returns PTT as a value in
.B set_ptt
above.
.
.TP
.BR S ", " set_split_vfo " \(aq" \fISplit\fP "\(aq \(aq" "\fITX VFO\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Split \(aq
mode.
.IP
Split is either \(oq0\(cq = Normal or \(oq1\(cq = Split.
.IP
Set
.RI \(aq "TX VFO" \(aq.
.IP
TX VFO is a token: \(oqVFOA\(cq, \(oqVFOB\(cq, \(oqVFOC\(cq, \(oqcurrVFO\(cq,
\(oqVFO\(cq, \(oqMEM\(cq, \(oqMain\(cq, \(oqSub\(cq, \(oqTX\(cq, \(oqRX\(cq.
.
.TP
.BR s ", " get_split_vfo
Get
.RI \(aq Split \(aq
mode.
.IP
Split is either \(oq0\(cq = Normal or \(oq1\(cq = Split.
.IP
Get
.RI \(aq "TX VFO" \(aq.
.IP
TX VFO is a token as in
.B set_split_vfo
above.
.
.TP
.BR I ", " set_split_freq " \(aq" "\fITx Frequency\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "TX Frequency" \(aq,
in Hz.
.IP
Frequency may be a floating point or integer value.
.
.TP
.BR i ", " get_split_freq
Get
.RI \(aq "TX Frequency" \(aq,
in Hz.
.IP
Returns an integer value.
.
.TP
.BR X ", " set_split_mode " \(aq" "\fITX Mode\fP" "\(aq \(aq" "\fITX Passband\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "TX Mode" \(aq
and
.RI \(aq "TX Passband" \(aq.
.IP
TX Mode is a token: \(oqUSB\(cq, \(oqLSB\(cq, \(oqCW\(cq, \(oqCWR\(cq,
\(oqRTTY\(cq, \(oqRTTYR\(cq, \(oqAM\(cq, \(oqFM\(cq, \(oqWFM\(cq, \(oqAMS\(cq,
\(oqPKTLSB\(cq, \(oqPKTUSB\(cq, \(oqPKTFM\(cq, \(oqECSSUSB\(cq,
\(oqECSSLSB\(cq, \(oqFA\(cq, \(oqSAM\(cq, \(oqSAL\(cq, \(oqSAH\(cq,
\(oqDSB\(cq.
.IP
TX Passband is in Hz as an integer, or \(oq0\(cq for the radio backend
default.
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a TX Mode token
will return a space separated list of radio backend supported TX Modes.  Use
this to determine the supported TX Modes of a given radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR x ", " get_split_mode
Get
.RI \(aq "TX Mode" \(aq
and
.RI \(aq "TX Passband" \(aq.
.IP
Returns TX Mode as a token and TX Passband in Hz as in
.B set_split_mode
above.
.
.TP
.BR Y ", " set_ant " \(aq" \fIAntenna\fP "\(aq \(aq" \fIOption\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Antenna \(aq
and
.RI \(aq Option \(aq.
.IP
Number is 1-based antenna# (\(oq1\(cq, \(oq2\(cq, \(oq3\(cq, ...).
.IP
Option depends on rig..for Icom it probably sets the Tx & Rx antennas as in the IC-7851. See your manual for rig specific option values. Most rigs don't care about the option.
.IP
For the IC-7851, FTDX3000 (and perhaps others) it means this:
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
1 = TX/RX = ANT1  FTDX3000=ANT1/ANT3
2 = TX/RX = ANT2  FTDX3000=ANT2/ANT3
3 = TX/RX = ANT3  FTDX3000=ANT3
4 = TX/RX = ANT1/ANT4
5 = TX/RX = ANT2/ANT4
6 = TX/RX = ANT3/ANT4
.EE
.in
.
.TP
.BR y ", " get_ant " \(aq" \fIAntenna\fP \(aq
Get
.RI \(aq Antenna \(aq
.IP
A value of 0 for Antenna will return the current TX antenna
.IP
> 0 is 1-based antenna# (\(oq1\(cq, \(oq2\(cq, \(oq3\(cq, ...).


.IP
Option returned depends on rig..for Icom is likely the RX only flag.
.
.TP
.BR b ", " send_morse " \(aq" \fIMorse\fP \(aq
Send
.RI \(aq Morse \(aq
symbols.  For Yaesu rigs use memory#.
.
.TP
.BR 0xbb ", " stop_morse "
Stop sending the current morse code.
.
.TP
.BR 0xbc ", " wait_morse "
Wait for morse to finish -- only works on full break-in
.
.TP
.BR 0x8b ", " get_dcd
Get
.RI \(aq DCD \(aq
(squelch) status: \(oq0\(cq (Closed) or \(oq1\(cq (Open).
.
.TP
.BR R ", " set_rptr_shift " \(aq" "\fIRptr Shift\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "Rptr Shift" \(aq.
.IP
Rptr Shift is one of: \(oq+\(cq, \(oq-\(cq, or something else for
\(oqNone\(cq.
.
.TP
.BR r ", " get_rptr_shift
Get
.RI \(aq "Rptr Shift" \(aq.
.IP
Returns \(oq+\(cq, \(oq-\(cq, or \(oqNone\(cq.
.
.TP
.BR O ", " set_rptr_offs " \(aq" "\fIRptr Offset\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "Rptr Offset" \(aq,
in Hz.
.
.TP
.BR o ", " get_rptr_offs
Get
.RI \(aq "Rptr Offset" \(aq,
in Hz.
.
.TP
.BR C ", " set_ctcss_tone " \(aq" "\fICTCSS Tone\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "CTCSS Tone" \(aq,
in tenths of Hz.
.
.TP
.BR c ", " get_ctcss_tone
Get
.RI \(aq "CTCSS Tone" \(aq,
in tenths of Hz.
.
.TP
.BR D ", " set_dcs_code " \(aq" "\fIDCS Code\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "DCS Code" \(aq.
.
.TP
.BR d ", " get_dcs_code
Get
.RI \(aq "DCS Code" \(aq.
.
.TP
.BR 0x90 ", " set_ctcss_sql " \(aq" "\fICTCSS Sql\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "CTCSS Sql" \(aq
tone, in tenths of Hz.
.
.TP
.BR 0x91 ", " get_ctcss_sql
Get
.RI \(aq "CTCSS Sql" \(aq
tone, in tenths of Hz.
.
.TP
.BR 0x92 ", " set_dcs_sql " \(aq" "\fIDCS Sql\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "DCS Sql" \(aq
code.
.
.TP
.BR 0x93 ", " get_dcs_sql
Get
.RI \(aq "DCS Sql" \(aq
 code.
.
.TP
.BR N ", " set_ts " \(aq" "\fITuning Step\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "Tuning Step" \(aq,
in Hz.
.
.TP
.BR n ", " get_ts
Get
.RI \(aq "Tuning Step" \(aq,
in Hz.
.
.TP
.BR U ", " set_func " \(aq" \fIFunc\fP "\(aq \(aq" "\fIFunc Status\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Func \(aq
and
.RI \(aq "Func Status" \(aq.
.IP
Func is a token: \(oqFAGC\(cq, \(oqNB\(cq, \(oqCOMP\(cq, \(oqVOX\(cq,
\(oqTONE\(cq, \(oqTSQL\(cq, \(oqSBKIN\(cq, \(oqFBKIN\(cq, \(oqANF\(cq,
\(oqNR\(cq, \(oqAIP\(cq, \(oqAPF\(cq, \(oqMON\(cq, \(oqMN\(cq, \(oqRF\(cq,
\(oqARO\(cq, \(oqLOCK\(cq, \(oqMUTE\(cq, \(oqVSC\(cq, \(oqREV\(cq,
\(oqSQL\(cq, \(oqABM\(cq, \(oqBC\(cq, \(oqMBC\(cq, \(oqRIT\(cq, \(oqAFC\(cq,
\(oqSATMODE\(cq, \(oqSCOPE\(cq, \(oqRESUME\(cq, \(oqTBURST\(cq, \(oqTUNER\(cq,
\(oqXIT\(cq.
.IP
Func Status is a non null value for \(lqactivate\(rq or \(lqde-activate\(rq
otherwise, much as TRUE/FALSE definitions in the C language (true is non-zero
and false is zero, \(oq0\(cq).
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Func token will
return a space separated list of radio backend supported set function tokens.
Use this to determine the supported functions of a given radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR u ", " get_func " \(aq" \fIFunc\fP \(aq
Get
.RI \(aq "Func Status" \(aq.
.IP
Returns Func Status as a non null value for the Func token given as in
.B set_func
above.
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Func token will
return a space separated list of radio backend supported get function tokens.
Use this to determine the supported functions of a given radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR L ", " set_level " \(aq" \fILevel\fP "\(aq \(aq" "\fILevel Value\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Level \(aq
and
.RI \(aq "Level Value" \(aq.
.IP
Level is a token: \(oqPREAMP\(cq, \(oqATT\(cq, \(oqVOXDELAY\(cq, \(oqAF\(cq,
\(oqRF\(cq, \(oqSQL\(cq, \(oqIF\(cq, \(oqAPF\(cq, \(oqNR\(cq, \(oqPBT_IN\(cq,
\(oqPBT_OUT\(cq, \(oqCWPITCH\(cq, \(oqRFPOWER\(cq, \(oqMICGAIN\(cq, 
\(oqKEYSPD\(cq, \(oqNOTCHF\(cq, \(oqCOMP\(cq, \(oqAGC\(cq, \(oqBKINDL\(cq,
\(oqBAL\(cq, \(oqMETER\(cq, \(oqVOXGAIN\(cq, \(oqANTIVOX\(cq,
\(oqSLOPE_LOW\(cq, \(oqSLOPE_HIGH\(cq, \(oqBKIN_DLYMS\(cq, \(oqRAWSTR\(cq, \(oqSWR\(cq,
\(oqALC\(cq, \(oqSTRENGTH\(cq, \(oqRFPOWER_METER\(cq, \(oqCOMPMETER\(cq, \(oqVD_METER\(cq, \(oqID_METER\(cq,
\(oqNOTCHF_RAW\(cq, \(oqMONITOR_GAIN\(cq, \(oqNQ\(cq, \(oqRFPOWER_METER_WATTS\cq, \(oqSPECTRUM_MODE\(cq,
\(oqSPECTRUM_SPAN\(cq, \(oqSPECTRUM_EDGE_LOW\(cq, \(oqSPECTRUM_EDGE_HIGH\(cq, \(oqSPECTRUM_SPEED\cq,
\(oqSPECTRUM_REF\(cq, (oqSPECTRUM_AVG\(cq, \(oqSPECTRUM_ATT\cq, \(oqTEMP_METER\cq, \(oqBAND_SELECT\(cq,
\(oqUSB_AF\(cq.
.IP
The Level Value can be a float or an integer value.  For the AGC token the
value is one of \(oq0\(cq = OFF, \(oq1\(cq = SUPERFAST, \(oq2\(cq = FAST,
\(oq3\(cq = SLOW, \(oq4\(cq = USER, \(oq5\(cq = MEDIUM, \(oq6\(cq = AUTO.
Note that not all values work on all rigs.  To list usable values do "rigctl -m [modelnum] -u | grep AGC levels" or for Windows "rigctl -m [modelnum] -u | find "AGC levels"".
.IP
Level units
.in +4n
.EX
0.0-1.0 where 0=0% and 1.0=100% (except for BAL where 50% is center)
    AF, ALC, ANTIVOX, BAL, COMP, MICGAIN, MONITOR_GAIN, NOTCHF_RAW, NR, RF, RFPOWER, RFPOWER_METER, USB_AF, VOXGAIN

Amps
    ID_METER(A)

dB
    NL, COMP_METER, PREAMP, ATT, SLOPE_LOW, SLOPE_HIGH, SPECTRUM_REF, SPECTRUM_ATT, STRENGTH

Degrees(temperature)
    TEMP_METER(C)

Hz
    CWPITCH, IF, NOTCHF, PBT_IN, PBT_OUT, SPECTRUM_EDGE_LOW, SPECTRUM_EDGE_HIGH, SPECTRUM_SPAN

Seconds 
    VOXDELAY(ds), BKINDL(ms), BKIN_DLYMS(ms)

Raw info from rig
    RAWSTR, BAND_SELECT (subject to change -- index right now but may convert to band name)

SWR
    SWR

Volts
    VD_METER

Lookup - if level shows 0/0/0 then it's probably a lookup value
    METER RIG_METER_XXXX 1=SWR, 2=COMP, 4=ALC, 8=IC, 16=DB, 32=PO, 64=VDD, 128=Temp
    AGC 0=None, 1=SuperFast, 2=Fast, 3=Slow, 4=User, 5=Medium, 6=Auto
        Note: Not all AGC values may be available -- see AGC Level in dumpcaps (e.g. rigctl -m 1035 -u | grep AGC)
    SPECTRUM_MODE 0=None, 1=Center, 2=Fixed, 3=Center Scroll, 4=Fixed Scroll
    SPECTRUM_AVG rig specific

Watts
    RFPOWER_METER_WATTS

WPM
    KEYSPD
.in
.EE
.IP
 
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Level token
will return a space separated list of radio backend supported set level
tokens.  Use this to determine the supported levels of a given radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR l ", " get_level " \(aq" \fILevel\fP \(aq
Get
.RI \(aq "Level Value" \(aq.
.IP
Returns Level Value as a float or integer for the Level token given as in
.B set_level
above.
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Level token
will return a space separated list of radio backend supported get level
tokens.  Use this to determine the supported levels of a given radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR P ", " set_parm " \(aq" \fIParm\fP "\(aq \(aq" "\fIParm Value\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Parm \(aq
and
.RI \(aq "Parm Value" \(aq.
.IP
Parm is a token: \(oqANN\(cq, \(oqAPO\(cq, \(oqBACKLIGHT\(cq, \(oqBEEP\(cq,
\(oqTIME\(cq, \(oqBAT\(cq, \(oqKEYLIGHT\(cq.
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Parm token will
return a space separated list of radio backend supported set parameter tokens.
Use this to determine the supported parameters of a given radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR p ", " get_parm " \(aq" \fIParm\fP \(aq
Get
.RI \(aq "Parm Value" \(aq.
.IP
Returns Parm Value as a float or integer for the Parm token given as in
.B set_parm
above.
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Parm token will
return a space separated list of radio backend supported get parameter tokens.
Use this to determine the supported parameters of a given radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR B ", " set_bank " \(aq" \fIBank\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Bank \(aq.
.IP
Sets the current memory bank number.
.
.TP
.BR E ", " set_mem " \(aq" \fIMemory#\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Memory# \(aq
channel number.
.
.TP
.BR e ", " get_mem
Get
.RI \(aq Memory# \(aq
channel number.
.
.TP
.BR G ", " vfo_op " \(aq" "\fIMem/VFO Op\fP" \(aq
Perform a
.RI \(aq "Mem/VFO Op" \(aq.
.IP
Mem/VFO Operation is a token: \(oqCPY\(cq, \(oqXCHG\(cq, \(oqFROM_VFO\(cq,
\(oqTO_VFO\(cq, \(oqMCL\(cq, \(oqUP\(cq, \(oqDOWN\(cq, \(oqBAND_UP\(cq,
\(oqBAND_DOWN\(cq, \(oqLEFT\(cq, \(oqRIGHT\(cq, \(oqTUNE\(cq, \(oqTOGGLE\(cq.
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Mem/VFO Op
token will return a space separated list of radio backend supported Set
Mem/VFO Op tokens.  Use this to determine the supported Mem/VFO Ops of a given
radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR g ", " scan " \(aq" "\fIScan Fct\fP" "\(aq \(aq" "\fIScan Channel\fP" \(aq
Perform a
.RI \(aq "Scan Fct" \(aq
on a
.RI \(aq "Scan Option" \(aq.
.IP
Scan Function is a token: \(oqSTOP\(cq, \(oqMEM\(cq, \(oqSLCT\(cq,
\(oqPRIO\(cq, \(oqPROG\(cq, \(oqDELTA\(cq, \(oqVFO\(cq, \(oqPLT\(cq.
.IP
Scan Option is an integer.  
.IP
Scan Option for Yaesu rigs 0=STOP, 1=UP, 2=DOWN.
.IP
Scan Option for Icom rigs is a channel number to program with G otherwise not used.
.IP
Scan Option for Kenwood rigs is not used.
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Scan Fct token
will return a space separated list of radio backend supported Scan Function
tokens.  Use this to determine the supported Scan Functions of a given radio
backend.
.
.TP
.BR H ", " set_channel " \(aq" \fIChannel\fP \(aq
Set memory
.RI \(aq Channel \(aq
data.
.IP
Sets memory channel information
.
.TP
.BR h ", " get_channel " \(aq" \fIreadonly\fP \(aq
Get channel memory.
.IP
If readonly!=0 then only channel data is returned and rig remains on the current channel.  If readonly=0 then rig will be set to the channel requested.
data.
.
.TP
.BR A ", " set_trn " \(aq" \fITransceive\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Transceive \(aq
mode.
.IP
Transcieve is a token: \(oqOFF\(cq, \(oqRIG\(cq, \(oqPOLL\(cq.
.IP
Transceive is a mechanism for radios to report events without a specific call
for information.
.IP
.BR Note :
Passing a \(oq?\(cq (query) as the first argument instead of a Transceive
token will return a space separated list of radio backend supported Transceive
mode tokens.  Use this to determine the supported Transceive modes of a given
radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR a ", " get_trn
Get
.RI \(aq Transceive \(aq
mode.
.IP
Transceive mode (reporting event) as in
.B set_trn
above.
.
.TP
.BR * ", " reset " \(aq" \fIReset\fP \(aq
Perform rig
.RI \(aq Reset \(aq.
.IP
Reset is a value: \(oq0\(cq = None, \(oq1\(cq = Software reset, \(oq2\(cq =
VFO reset, \(oq4\(cq = Memory Clear reset, \(oq8\(cq = Master reset.
.IP
Since these values are defined as a bitmask in
.IR include/hamlib/rig.h ,
it should be possible to AND these values together to do multiple resets at
once, if the backend supports it or supports a reset action via rig control at
all.
.
.TP
.BR 0x87 ", " set_powerstat " \(aq" "\fIPower Status\fP" \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq "Power Status" \(aq.
.IP
Power Status is a value: \(oq0\(cq = Power Off, \(oq1\(cq = Power On,
\(oq2\(cq = Power Standby (enter standby), \(oq4\(cq = Power Operate (leave
standby).
.
.TP
.BR 0x88 ", " get_powerstat
Get
.RI \(aq "Power Status" \(aq
as in
.B set_powerstat
above.
.
.TP
.BR 0x89 ", " send_dtmf " \(aq" \fIDigits\fP \(aq
Set DTMF
.RI \(aq Digits \(aq.
.
.TP
.BR 0x8a ", " recv_dtmf
Get DTMF
.RI \(aq Digits \(aq.
.
.TP
.BR _ ", " get_info
Get misc information about the rig.
.
.TP
.BR 0xf5 ", " get_rig_info
Get misc information about the rig vfo status and other info.
.
.TP
.BR 0xf3 ", " get_vfo_info " \(aq" \fIVFO\fP \(aq
Get misc information about a specific vfo.
.
.TP
.B dump_state
Return certain state information about the radio backend.
.
.TP
.BR 1 ", " dump_caps
Not a real rig remote command, it just dumps capabilities, i.e. what the
backend knows about this model, and what it can do.
.IP
TODO: Ensure this is in a consistent format so it can be read into a hash,
dictionary, etc.  Bug reports requested.
.IP
.BR Note :
This command will produce many lines of output so be very careful if using a
fixed length array!  For example, running this command against the Dummy
backend results in over 5kB of text output.
.IP
VFO parameter not used in 'VFO mode'.
.
.TP
.BR 2 ", " power2mW " \(aq" "\fIPower [0.0..1.0]\fP" "\(aq \(aq" \fIFrequency\fP "\(aq \(aq" \fIMode\fP \(aq
Returns
.RI \(aq "Power mW" \(aq.
.IP
Converts a Power value in a range of
.IR 0.0 ... 1.0
to the real transmit power in milli-Watts (integer).
.IP
.RI \(aq Frequency \(aq
and
.RI \(aq Mode \(aq
also need to be provided as output power may vary according to these values.
.IP
VFO parameter is not used in VFO mode.
.
.TP
.BR 4 ", " mW2power " \(aq" "\fIPower mW\fP" "\(aq \(aq" \fIFrequency\fP "\(aq \(aq" \fIMode\fP \(aq
Returns
.RI \(aq "Power [0.0..1.0]" \(aq.
.IP
Converts the real transmit power in milli-Watts (integer) to a Power value in
a range of
.IR "0.0 ... 1.0" .
.IP
.RI \(aq Frequency \(aq
and
.RI \(aq Mode \(aq
also need to be provided as output power may vary according to these values.
.IP
VFO parameter is not used in VFO mode.
.
.TP
.BR w ", " send_cmd " \(aq" \fICmd\fP \(aq
Send a raw command string to the radio.
.IP
This is useful for testing and troubleshooting radio commands and responses when
developing a backend.
.IP
For binary protocols enter values as \\0xAA\\0xBB.  Expect a
.RI \(aq Reply \(aq
from the radio which will likely be a binary block or an ASCII string
depending on the radio's protocol (see your radio's computer control
documentation).
.IP
The command terminator, set by the
.B send-cmd-term
option above, will terminate each command string sent to the radio.  This
character should not be a part of the input string.
.
.TP
.BR W ", " send_cmd_rx " \(aq" \fICmd\fP\(aq " " \fI[nbytes or terminator char\FP
Send a raw command string to the radio and expect nbytes returned or the terminator char (e.g. ;).
.IP
This is useful for testing and troubleshooting radio commands and responses when
developing a backend.  If the # of bytes requested is <= the number actually returned no timeout will occur.
.IP
The command argument can have no spaces in it.
For binary protocols enter values as \\0xAA\\0xBB.  Expect a
.RI \(aq Reply \(aq
from the radio which will likely be a binary block or an ASCII string
depending on the radio's protocol (see your radio's computer control
documentation).
.IP
The command terminator, set by the
.B send-cmd-term
option above, will terminate each command string sent to the radio.  This
character should not be a part of the input string.
.
.TP
.BR set_clock " \(aq" \fIDateTime\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq DateTime \(aq
.IP
Sets rig clock -- note that some rigs do not handle seconds or milliseconds.
If you try to set sec/msec and rig does not support it you will get a debug warning message.
Format is ISO8601,
.EX
Formats accepted allow for 2-digit or 4-digit time zone
YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.SSS+ZZ (where +ZZ is either -/+ UTC offset HH)
YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.SSS+ZZZZ (where +ZZZZ is either -/+ UTC offset HHMM)
YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS+ZZ
YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS+ZZZZ
YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM+ZZ
YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM+ZZZZ
YYYY-MM-DD (sets date only)
Note: Icom rigs expect you to set local time and the hours off to UTC.
So...4PM EST example would be 2021-12-01T16:00:00+0500
But...if you want to display GMT you must set the clock for GMT with zero UTC offset.  
Hopefully Icom will allow displaying either clock in the future

.EE
.
.TP
.BR get_clock
Get
.RI \(aq RigTime \(aq
.IP
Gets rig clock -- note that some rigs do not handle seconds or milliseconds.
Format is ISO8601 YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SS.sss+ZZ where +ZZ is either -/+ UTC offset
.
.TP
.BR chk_vfo
Get
.RI \(aq Status \(aq
.IP
Returns Status as 1 if vfo option is on and 0 if vfo option is off.
This command reflects the -o switch for rigctl and ritctld and can be dynamically changed by
.B set_vfo_opt.
.
.TP
.BR set_vfo_opt " \(aq" \fIStatus\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq Status \(aq
.IP
Set vfo option Status 1=on or 0=off
This is the same as using the -o switch for rigctl and ritctld.
This can be dyamically changed while running.
.
.TP
.BR get_separator 
Get
.RI \(aq SeparatorChar \(aq
.IP
Shows the current SeparatorChar
.
.TP
.BR set_separator " \(aq" \fISeparatorChar\fP \(aq
Set
.RI \(aq SeparatorChar \(aq
.IP
Change rigctld response to use a special char instead of newline (recommend #).
This can be dyamically changed while running.
Handy for node-red's tcprequest node.
This can be dyamically changed while running.
.
.TP
.BR pause " \(aq" \fISeconds\fP \(aq
Pause for the given whole (integer) number of
.RI \(aq Seconds \(aq
before sending the next command to the radio.
.
.TP
.BR password " \(aq" \fIPassword\fP \(aq
Sends password to rigctld when rigctld has been secured with -A.  Must use the 32-char shared secret from rigctld.
.
.TP
.BR set_lock_mode " \(aq" \fILocked\fP \(aq
Turns mode lock on(1) or off(0) (only when using rigctld).  Turning on will prevent all clients from changing the rig mode.
For example this is useful when running CW Skimmer in FM mode on an IC-7300.  Clicking spots
in a spotting program will not change the VFOA mode when lock is on.  So "set_lock_mode 1" when
CW Skimmer is started and "set_lock_mode 0" when CW Skimmer is stopped.
.
.TP
.BR get_lock_mode
Returns current lock mode status 1=On, 2=Off (only useful when using rigctld)
.
.TP
.BR send_raw " \(aq" \fITerminator\fP "\(aq \(aq" \fIString\fP \(aq
.EX
Can send ASCII string or 0xnn values -- there can be no spaces in the command string.
Possible terminator values are CR, LF, ;, ICOM, 0-100 (bytes to read), or -1 meaning unknown (will timeout on read)
Examples:
  send_raw ; FA;MD;
  send_raw icom 0xFE;0xFE;0x94;0x03;0xFD
  send_raw -1 0xFE;0xFE;0x94;0x03;0xFD
  send_raw 14 0xFE;0xFE;0x94;0x03;0xFD
.
.SH READLINE
.
If
.B Readline
library development files are found at configure time,
.B rigctl
will be conditonally built with Readline support for command and argument entry.
Readline command key bindings are at their defaults as described in the
.UR https://tiswww.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/rluserman.html
Readline manual
.UE .
.B rigctl
sets the name \(lqrigctl\(rq which can be used in Conditional Init Constructs
in the Readline Init File
.RI ( $HOME/.inputrc
by default) for custom keybindings unique to
.BR rigctl .
.
.PP
Command history is available with Readline support as described in the
.UR https://tiswww.case.edu/php/chet/readline/history.html#SEC1
Readline History manual
.UE .
Command and argument strings are stored as single lines even when arguments
are prompted for input individually.  Commands and arguments are not validated
and are stored as typed with values separated by a single space.
.
.PP
Normally session history is not saved, however, use of either of the
.BR \-i / \-\-read\-history
or
.BR \-I / \-\-save\-history
options when starting
.B rigctl
will cause any previously saved history to be read in and/or the
current and any previous session history (assuming the
.BR -i " and " -I
options are given together) will be written out when
.B rigctl
is closed.  Each option is mutually exclusive, i.e. either may be given
separately or in combination.  This is useful to save a set of commands and
then read them later but not write the modified history for a consistent set
of test commands in interactive mode, for example.
.
.PP
History is stored in
.I $HOME/.rigctl_history
by default although the destination directory may be changed by setting the
.B RIGCTL_HIST_DIR
environment variable.  When RIGCTL_HIST_DIR is unset, the value of the
.B HOME
environment variable is used instead.  Only the destination directory may be
changed at this time.
.
.PP
If Readline support is not found at configure time the original internal
command handler is used.  Readline is not used for
.B rigctl
commands entered on the command line regardless if Readline support is built
in or not.
.
.PP
.BR Note :
Readline support is not included in the MS Windows 32 or 64 bit binary builds
supplied by the Hamlib Project.  Running
.B rigctl
on the MS Windows platform in the \(oqcmd\(cq shell does give session command
line history, however, it is not saved to disk between sessions.
.
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.
The
.BR \-v ,
.B \-\-verbose
option allows different levels of diagnostics
to be output to
.B stderr
and correspond to \-v for
.BR BUG ,
\-vv for
.BR ERR ,
\-vvv for
.BR WARN ,
\-vvvv for
.BR VERBOSE ,
or \-vvvvv for
.BR TRACE .
.
.PP
A given verbose level is useful for providing needed debugging information to
the email address below.  For example, TRACE output shows all of the values
sent to and received from the radio which is very useful for radio backend
library development and may be requested by the developers.
.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B rigctl
exits with:
.
.TP
.B 0
if all operations completed normally;
.
.TP
.B 1
if there was an invalid command line option or argument;
.
.TP
.B 2
if an error was returned by
.BR Hamlib .
.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
Start
.B rigctl
for a Yaesu FT-920 using a USB to serial adapter on Linux in interactive mode:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " rigctl -m 1014 -r /dev/ttyUSB1"
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Start
.B rigctl
for a Yaesu FT-920 using COM1 on MS Windows while generating TRACE output to
.IR stderr :
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB > " rigctl -m 1014 -r COM1 -vvvvv"
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Start
.B rigctl
for a Yaesu FT-920 using a USB to serial adapter while setting baud rate and
stop bits:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " rigctl -m 1014 -r /dev/ttyUSB1 -s 4800 -C stop_bits=2"
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Start
.B rigctl
for an Elecraft K3 using a USB to serial adapter while specifying a command
terminator for the
.B w
command:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " rigctl -m 2029 -r /dev/ttyUSB0 -t';'"
.EE
.in
.
.PP
Connect to a running
.B rigctld
with radio model 2 (\(lqNET rigctl\(rq) on the local host and specifying the
TCP port, setting frequency and mode:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " rigctl -m 2 -r localhost:4532 F 7253500 M LSB 0"
.EE
.in
.
.
.SH BUGS
.
.B set_chan
has no entry method as of yet, hence left unimplemented.
.PP
This almost empty section...
.PP
Report bugs to:
.IP
.nf
.MT hamlib\-developer@lists.sourceforge.net
Hamlib Developer mailing list
.ME
.fi
.
.
.SH COPYING
.
This file is part of Hamlib, a project to develop a library that simplifies
radio, rotator, and amplifier control functions for developers of software
primarily of interest to radio amateurs and those interested in radio
communications.
.
.PP
Copyright \(co 2000-2011 Stephane Fillod
.br
Copyright \(co 2000-2018 the Hamlib Group (various contributors)
.br
Copyright \(co 2010-2020 Nate Bargmann
.
.PP
This is free software; see the file COPYING for copying conditions.  There is
NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR less (1),
.BR more (1),
.BR rigctld (1),
.BR hamlib (7)
.
.
.SH COLOPHON
.
Links to the Hamlib Wiki, Git repository, release archives, and daily snapshot
archives are available via
.
.UR http://www.hamlib.org
hamlib.org
.UE .
