.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For layout and available macros, see man(7), man-pages(7), groff_man(7)
.\" Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Note: Please keep this page in sync with the source, rigctlsync.c
.\"
.TH RIGCTLSYNC "1" "2023-01-27" "Hamlib" "Hamlib Utilities"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
rigctlsync \- synchronize a rig to SDR# (or other rig) 
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.
.SY rigctlsync
.OP \-hlLuV
.OP \-m id
.OP \-r device
.OP \-R device
.OP \-s baud
.OP \-S baud
.OP \-c id
.OP \-C parm=val
.OP \-B
.RB [ \-v [ \-Z ]]
.YS
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Allows you to synchronize frequency from a rig to SDR#.
Best when used with rigctld, FlRig, or a multiport radio.
.
.PP
Please report bugs and provide feedback at the e-mail address given in the
.B BUGS
section below.  Patches and code enhancements sent to the same address are
welcome.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax.  Short options that
take an argument may have the value follow immediately or be separated by a
space.  Long options starting with two dashes (\(oq\-\(cq) require an
\(oq=\(cq between the option and any argument.
.
.PP
Here is a summary of the supported options:
.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-model = \fIid\fP
Select radio model number.
.IP
See model list (use \(lqrigctlsync -l\(rq).
.IP
.BR Note :
.B rigctlsync
(or third party software using the C API) will use radio model 2 for
.B NET rigctl
(communicating with
.BR rigctld ).
.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rig\-file = \fIdevice\fP
Use
.I device
as the file name of the port connected to the radio.
.IP
Often a serial port, but could be a USB to serial adapter.  Typically
.IR /dev/ttyS0 ", " /dev/ttyS1 ", " /dev/ttyUSB0 ,
etc. on Linux,
.IR COM1 ", " COM2 ,
etc. on MS Windows.  The BSD flavors and Mac OS/X have their own designations.
See your system's documentation.
.IP
The special string \(lquh\-rig\(rq may be given to enable micro-ham device
support.
.
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-rig\-file2 = \fIdevice\fP
Use
.I device
as the file name of one of the virtual com ports -- your program will connect
to the other com port of the virtual pair.
.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-serial\-speed = \fIbaud\fP
Set serial speed to
.I baud
rate.
.IP
Uses maximum serial speed from radio backend capabilities (set by
.B -m
above) as the default.
.
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-serial\-speed2 = \fIbaud\fP
Set serial speed to
.I baud
rate for virtual com port (see
.BR -R ).
.
.IP
Uses maximum serial speed from radio backend capabilities (set by
.B -m
above) as the default.
.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-civaddr = \fIid\fP
Use
.I id
as the CI-V address to communicate with the rig.
.IP
Only useful for Icom and some Ten-Tec rigs.
.IP
.BR Note :
The
.I id
is in decimal notation, unless prefixed by
.IR 0x ,
in which case it is hexadecimal.
.
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-show\-conf
List all config parameters for the radio defined with
.B \-m
above.
.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-set\-conf = \fIparm=val\fP [ \fI,parm=val\fP ]
Set radio configuration parameter(s), e.g.
.IR stop_bits=2 .
.IP
Use the
.B -L
option above for a list of configuration parameters for a given model number.
.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-dump\-caps
Dump capabilities for the radio defined with
.B -m
above and exit.
.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List all model numbers defined in
.B Hamlib
and exit.
.IP
The list is sorted by model number.
.IP
.BR Note :
In Linux the list can be scrolled back using
.BR Shift-PageUp / Shift-PageDown ,
or using the scrollbars of a virtual terminal in X or the cmd window in
Windows.  The output can be piped to
.BR more (1)
or
.BR less (1),
e.g. \(lqrigctl -l | more\(rq.
.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-restore\-ai
.B rigctl
restores the state of auto information (AI) on the controlled rig.
.IP
If this is not desired, for example if you are using
.B rigctl
to turn AI mode on or off, pass this option.
.
.TP
.BR \-B ", " \-\-mapa2b
Maps set_freq on VFOA to VFOB instead.
This allows using CW skimmer with the rig in split mode and clicking on a frequency in CW skimmer
will set VFOB to the transmit frequency.
.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Set verbose mode, cumulative (see
.B DIAGNOSTICS
below).
.
.TP
.BR \-Z ", " \-\-debug\-time\-stamps
Enable time stamps for the debug messages.
.IP
Use only in combination with the
.B -v
option as it generates no output on its own.
.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a summary of these options and exit.
.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version of
.B rigctl
and exit.
.
.PP
.BR Note :
Some options may not be implemented by a given backend and will return an
error.  This is most likely to occur with the
.B \-\-set\-conf
and
.B \-\-show\-conf
options.
.
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.
The
.BR \-v ,
.B \-\-verbose
option allows different levels of diagnostics
to be output to
.B stderr
and correspond to \-v for
.BR BUG ,
\-vv for
.BR ERR ,
\-vvv for
.BR WARN ,
\-vvvv for
.BR VERBOSE ,
or \-vvvvv for
.BR TRACE .
.
.PP
A given verbose level is useful for providing needed debugging information to
the email address below.  For example, TRACE output shows all of the values
sent to and received from the radio which is very useful for radio backend
library development and may be requested by the developers.
.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B rigctlsync
exits with:
.
.TP
.B 0
if all operations completed normally;
.
.TP
.B 1
if there was an invalid command line option or argument;
.
.TP
.B 2
if an error was returned by
.BR Hamlib .
.
.
.SH EXAMPLE
.
Start
.B rigctlsync
with FLRig as the Hamlib model
.UE .
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " rigctlsync -m 4 -M 9 -R 192.168.1.1:4532"
.EE
.in
.
.PP
The following diagram shows the communications flow that allows N1MM Logger+
to communicate with a radio connected to Flrig:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
Flrig -><- rigctlcom -> COM9 <- virt_port_pipe -> COM10 <- N1MM
.EE
.in
.
.
.SH BUGS
.
.PP
Report bugs to:
.IP
.nf
.MT hamlib\-developer@lists.sourceforge.net
Hamlib Developer mailing list
.ME
.fi
.
.
.SH COPYING
.
This file is part of Hamlib, a project to develop a library that simplifies
radio, rotator, and amplifier control functions for developers of software
primarily of interest to radio amateurs and those interested in radio
communications.
.
.PP
Copyright \(co 2000-2011 Stephane Fillod
.br
Copyright \(co 2000-2018 the Hamlib Group (various contributors)
.br
Copyright \(co 2010-2020 Nate Bargmann
.br
Copyright \(co 2019 Michael Black W9MDB
.
.PP
This is free software; see the file COPYING for copying conditions.  There is
NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR rigctld (1),
.BR rigctl (1),
.BR socat (1),
.BR hamlib (7)
.
.
.SH COLOPHON
.
Links to the Hamlib Wiki, Git repository, release archives, and daily snapshot
archives are available via
.
.UR http://www.hamlib.org
hamlib.org
.UE .
