.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For layout and available macros, see man(7), man-pages(7), groff_man(7)
.\" Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Note: Please keep this page in sync with the source, rigctltcp.c
.\"
.TH RIGCTLTCP "1" "2026-02-14" "Hamlib" "Hamlib Utilities"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
rigctltcp \- TCP multicast control of radio transceivers and receivers
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY rigctltcp
.OP \-hlLuoVR
.OP \-m id
.OP \-r device
.OP \-p device
.OP \-d device
.OP \-P type
.OP \-D type
.OP \-s baud
.OP \-c id
.OP \-S char
.OP \-C parm=val
.OP \-T ipaddr
.OP \-t num
.OP \-M addr
.OP \-n port
.OP \-W secs
.OP \-w secs
.OP \-x option
.OP \-A password
.RB [ \-v [ \-Z ]]
.YS
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
Network daemon enabling UDP multicast broadcasts containing rig snapshot data.
.
Supports bidirectional rig control and status.
.
Broadcast data can be either
.BR rigctld (1)
token pairs or
.IR JSON .
.
.PP
All packets are tagged with a unique
.I id
string so multiple rigs can broadcast/rx on the same port.
.
Will eventually be able to set frequency, mode, passband width, PTT status,
satmode, and split status to start since those are common to many apps.
.
More functions plan to be added as time goes on.
.
.PP
Broadcast packet contents are based on
.I get_rig_info
output and may contain multiple VFO lines.
.
See
.B EXAMPLES
below.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax.
.
Short options that take an argument may have the value follow immediately or be
separated by a space.
.
Long options starting with two dashes (\(oq\-\(cq) require an \(oq=\(cq between
the option and any argument.
.
.PP
Here is a summary of the supported options:
.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-model = \fIID\fP
Select radio model number.
.
Defaults to Dummy,
.I ID
.BR 1 . 
.IP
See model list (use \(lqrigctltcp \-l\(rq).
.IP
.BR Note :
.B rigctltcp
(or third party software using the C API) will use
.I ID
.B 2
for
.B NET rigctl
(communicating with 
.BR rigctld ).
.
.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rig\-file = \fIDEVICE\fP
Use
.I DEVICE
as the file name of the port connected to the radio.
.IP
Typically
.IR /dev/ttyS0 ", " /dev/ttyS1 ", " /dev/ttyUSB0 ,
etc. on Linux,
.IR COM1 ", " COM2 ,
etc. on MS Windows.
.
The BSD flavors and MacOS have their own device names.
.
See your system's documentation.
.IP
Can be a network address:port, e.g.
.IR 127.0.0.1:12345
.IP
The special string \(lquh\-rig\(rq may be given to enable micro-ham device
support.
.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-ptt\-file = \fIDEVICE\fP
Use
.I DEVICE
as the file name of the Push To Talk device using a device filename as described
in
.B \-r
above.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-dcd\-file = \fIDEVICE\fP
Use
.I DEVICE
as the file name of the Data Carrier Detect device using a device filename as
described in
.B \-r
above.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-ptt\-type = \fITYPE\fP
Use
.I TYPE
of Push To Talk device.
.IP
Supported types are \(oqRIG\(cq (CAT command), \(oqDTR\(cq, \(oqRTS\(cq,
\(oqPARALLEL\(cq, \(oqCM108\(cq, \(oqGPIO\(cq, \(oqGPION\(cq, \(oqNONE\(cq,
overriding PTT type defined in the rig's backend.
.IP
Some side effects of this command are that when type is set to DTR, read
PTT state comes from the
.B Hamlib
frontend, not read from the radio.
.
When set to NONE, PTT state cannot be read or set even if rig backend supports
reading/setting PTT status from the rig.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-D ", " \-\-dcd\-type = \fITYPE\fP
Use
.I TYPE
of Data Carrier Detect device.
.IP
Supported types are \(oqRIG\(cq (CAT command), \(oqDSR\(cq, \(oqCTS\(cq,
\(oqCD\(cq, \(oqPARALLEL\(cq, \(oqCM108\(cq, \(oqGPIO\(cq, \(oqGPION\(cq,
\(oqNONE\(cq.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-serial\-speed = \fIBAUD\fP
Set serial speed to
.I BAUD
rate.
.IP
Uses maximum serial speed from radio backend capabilities (set by
.B \-m
above) as the default.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-civaddr = \fIID\fP
Use
.I ID
as the CI\[en]V address to communicate with the rig.
.IP
Only useful for Icom and some Ten\[en]Tec rigs.
.IP
.BR Note :
The
.I id
is in decimal notation, unless prefixed by
.IR 0x ,
in which case it is hexadecimal.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-S ", " \-\-separator = \fICHAR\fP
Use
.I CHAR 
as separator instead of line feed.
.IP
The default is
.IR \[rs]n .
.
Recommend using
.I $
or
.I @
as they work on both POSIX and MS Windows.
.IP
.
.
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-show\-conf
List all config parameters for the radio defined with
.B \-m
above.
.
Will exit if no
.B \-r
is given.
.B Note
the dummy device has no serial parameters.
.
.
.TP 
.BR \-C ", " \-\-set\-conf = \fIPARM=val\fP [ \fI,PARM=val\fP ]
Set configuration parameter(s). Some common ones are:
.in +4
.BR async :
.I True
enables asynchronous data transfer for backends that support it.
.
This allows use of transceive and spectrum data.
.br
.BR auto_power_on :
.I True
enables compatible rigs to be powered up on open.
.br
.BR auto_power_off :
.I True
enables compatible rigs to be powered down on close.
.br
.BR auto_disable_screensaver :
.I True
enables compatible rigs to have their screen saver disabled on open.
.br
.BR dcd_type :
Data Carrier Detect (or squelch) interface type override.
.br
.BR dcd_pathname :
Path name to the device file of the Data Carrier Detect (or
squelch).
.br
.BR disable_yaesu_bandselect :
.I True
disables the automatic band select on band change for Yaesu rigs.
.br
.BR dtr_state :
.I ON
turns on DTR,
.I OFF
turns it off, disabled when not set.
.br
.BR freq_skip :
.RI != 0
skips setting freq on TX_VFO when in RX and on RX_VFO when in TX\[em]for use
with gpredict and rigs that do not have TARGETABLE_VFO.
.br
.BR lo_freq :
Frequency to add to the VFO frequency for use with a transverter.
.br
.BR post_write_delay :
Delay in ms between each command sent out.
.br
.BR ptt_share :
.I True
enables ptt port to be shared with other apps.
.br
.BR ptt_type :
Push\[en]To\[en]Talk interface type override.
.br
.BR ptt_pathname :
Path name to the device file of the Push\[en]To\[en]Talk.
.br
.BR ptt_bitnum :
Push\[en]To\[en]Talk GPIO bit number.
.br
.BR retry :
Max number of retries.
.br
.BR rts_state :
.I ON
turns on DTR,
.I OFF
turns it off, disabled when not set.
.br
.BR twiddle_timeout :
For satellite ops when VFOB is twiddled will pause VFOB commands until timeout.
.br
.BR twiddle_rit :
Suppress get_freq on VFOB for RIT tuning satellites.
.br
.BR timeout :
Timeout in ms.
.br
.BR write_delay :
Delay in mS between each byte sent out.
.br
.BR tuner_control_pathname :
Path name to a script/program to control a tuner with 1 argument of
.IR 0 / 1
for Tuner
.IR Off / On .
.in
.
.IP
Use the
.B -L
option above for a list of configuration parameters for a given model number.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list
List all model numbers defined in
.B Hamlib
and exit.
.IP
The list is sorted by model number.
.IP
.BR Note :
The list can be scrolled back using
.BR Shift-PageUp / Shift-PageDown ,
or using the scrollbars of a terminal emulator in X/Wayland or the cmd window in
MS Windows.
.
The output can be piped to
.BR more (1)
or
.BR less (1),
e.g. \(lqrigctltcp \-l | more\(rq.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-dump\-caps
Dump capabilities for the radio defined with 
.B \-m
above and exit.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-vfo
Enable vfo mode.
.IP
An extra VFO argument will be required in front of each appropriate command
(except
.BR set_vfo ).
Otherwise, \(oqcurrVFO\(cq is used when this option is not set and an extra
VFO argument is not used.
.IP
See
.B chk_vfo
below.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Set verbose mode, cumulative (see
.B DIAGNOSTICS
below).
.
.
.TP 
.BR \-T ", " \-\-listen\-addr = \fIIPADDR\fP
Use 
.I IPADDR
as the listening IP address.
.IP
The default is ANY (0.0.0.0).
.
.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-port = \fINUM\fP
Use
.I NUM
as the TCP listening port.
.IP
The default is 4531.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-M ", " \-\-multicast\-addr = \fIADDR\fP
Use
.I ADDR
as the multicast IP address.
.IP
The default is OFF (0.0.0.0).
.IP
Recommended IPv4 setting is 224.0.1.1.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-multicast\-port = \fIPORT\fP
Use
.I number
as the TCP listening port.
.IP
The default is 4532.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-W ", " \-\-twiddle_timeout = \fISECONDS\fP
Enables timeout when VFO twiddling is detected.
.
Some functions will be ignored.
.IP
Should only be needed when controlling software should be "paused"
so you can move the VFO.
.
Continuous movement extends the timeout.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-twiddle_rit = \fISECONDS\fP
Suppress VFOB
.B get_freq
so RIT can be twiddled.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-uplink = \fIOPTION\fP
.IR 1 =Sub,
.IR 2 =Main.
.IP
For GPredict use this option to ignore
.B get_freq
for Sub or Main uplink VFO.
.IP
Should allow downlink VFO movement without confusing GPredict or the uplink.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-Z ", " \-\-debug\-time\-stamps
Enable time stamps for the debug messages.
.IP
Use only in combination with the
.B \-v
option as it generates no output on its own.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-password = \fIPASSWORD\fP
Sets a password on
.B rigctltcp
which requires Hamlib to use
.B rig_set_password
and clients to use
.I PASSWORD
to access rigctltcp.
.
A 32 character shared secret will be displayed to be used on the client side.
.IP
.B (NOT IMPLEMENTED)
.
.
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-rigctltcp\-idle
Will make
.B rigctltcp
close the rig when no clients are connected.
.
Normally remains connected to speed up connects.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a summary of these options and exit.
.
.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version of
.B rigctltcp
and exit.
.
.
.PP
.BR Note :
Some options may not be implemented by a given backend and will return an
error.
.
This is most likely to occur with the
.B \-\-set\-conf
and
.B \-\-show\-conf
options.
.
.
.PP
Please note that the backend for the radio to be controlled, or the radio
itself may not support some commands.
.
In that case, the operation will fail with a
.B Hamlib
error code.
.
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.
The
.BR \-v ,
.B \-\-verbose
option allows different levels of diagnostics
to be output to
.B stderr
and correspond to \-v for
.BR BUG ,
\-vv for
.BR ERR ,
\-vvv for
.BR WARN ,
\-vvvv for
.BR VERBOSE ,
or \-vvvvv for
.BR TRACE .
.
.PP
A given verbose level is useful for providing needed debugging information to
the email address below.  For example, TRACE output shows all of the values
sent to and received from the radio which is very useful for radio backend
library development and may be requested by the developers.
.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B rigctltcp
exits with:
.
.TP
.B 0
if all operations completed normally;
.
.TP
.B 1
if there was an invalid command line option or argument;
.
.TP
.B 2
if an error was returned by
.BR Hamlib .
.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.
This is an example of a multicast packet as of 2023-10-20.
.
.PP
.EX
{
  "app": "Hamlib",
  "version": "4.6~git 2023-10-20T16:52:59Z SHA=d87671",
  "seq": 183,
  "time": "2023-10-20T20:13:53.139869-0000",
  "crc": 0,
  "rig": {
    "id": "FLRig:127.0.0.1:12345:30508",
    "status": "OK",
    "errorMsg": "",
    "name": "FLRig",
    "split": false,
    "splitVfo": "VFOA",
    "satMode": false,
    "modelist": "AM CW USB LSB FM CWR PKTLSB PKTUSB "
  },
  "vfos": [
    {
      "name": "VFOA",
      "freq": 14074270,
      "mode": "PKTUSB",
      "width": 3,
      "ptt": false,
      "rx": true,
      "tx": true
    },
    {
      "name": "VFOB",
      "freq": 14074500,
      "mode": "",
      "width": 0,
      "ptt": false,
      "rx": false,
      "tx": false
    }
  ],
  "spectra": [
    {
      "id": 0,
      "name": "?",
      "type": "FIXED",
      "minLevel": 0,
      "maxLevel": 0,
      "minStrength": 0,
      "maxStrength": 0,
      "centerFreq": 0,
      "span": 0,
      "lowFreq": 0,
      "highFreq": 0,
      "length": 0,
      "data": ""
    }
  ]
}
.EE
.
.
.SH BUGS
.
This woefully incomplete document.
.
.
.SH COPYING
.
This file is part of Hamlib, a project to develop a library that simplifies
radio, rotator, and amplifier control functions for developers of software
primarily of interest to radio amateurs and those interested in radio
communications.
.
.PP
Copyright \(co 2000-2011 Stephane Fillod
.br
Copyright \(co 2000-2026 the Hamlib Group (various contributors)
.br
Copyright \(co 2010-2026 Nate Bargmann
.
.PP
This is free software; see the file COPYING for copying conditions.
.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR rigctl (1),
.BR hamlib (7)
.
.
.SH COLOPHON
.
Links to the Hamlib Wiki, Git repository, release archives, and daily snapshot
archives are available via
.
.UR http://www.hamlib.org
hamlib.org
.UE .
