.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For layout and available macros, see man(7), man-pages(7), groff_man(7)
.\" Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Note: Please keep this page in sync with the source, rigmem.c
.\"
.TH RIGMEM "1" "2020-09-09" "Hamlib" "Hamlib Utilities"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
rigmem \- backup and restore memory of radio transceivers and receivers
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.
.SY rigmem
.OP \-ahvVx
.OP \-m id
.OP \-r device
.OP \-s baud
.OP \-c id
.OP \-C parm=val
.OP \-p sep
command
.RI [ file ]
.YS
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
Backup and restore memory of radio transceivers and receivers.
.B rigmem
accepts
.IR command s
from the command line only.
.
.PP
Keep in mind that Hamlib is BETA level software.  While a lot of backend
libraries lack complete radio support, the basic functions are usually well
supported.
.
.PP
Please report bugs and provide feedback at the e-mail address given in the
.B BUGS
section below.  Patches and code enhancements sent to the same address are
welcome.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax.  Short options that
take an argument may have the value follow immediately or be separated by a
space.  Long options starting with two dashes (\(oq\-\(cq) require an
\(oq=\(cq between the option and any argument.
.
.PP
Here is a summary of the supported options:
.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-model = \fIid\fP
Select radio model number.
.IP
See model list (use \(lqrigctl \-l\(rq).
.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rig\-file = \fIdevice\fP
Use
.I device
as the file name of the port connected to the radio.
.IP
Often a serial port, but could be a USB to serial adapter.  Typically
.IR /dev/ttyS0 ", " /dev/ttyS1 ", " /dev/ttyUSB0 ,
etc. on Linux,
.IR COM1 ", " COM2 ,
etc. on MS Windows.  The BSD flavors and Mac OS/X have their own designations.
See your system's documentation.
.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-serial\-speed = \fIbaud\fP
Set radio serial speed to
.I baud
rate.
.IP
Uses maximum serial speed from radio backend capabilities as the default.
.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-civaddr = \fIid\fP
Use
.I id
as the CI-V address to communicate with the radio.
.IP
Only useful for Icom and some Ten-Tec radios.
.IP
.BR Note :
The
.I id
is in decimal notation, unless prefixed by
.IR 0x ,
in which case it is hexadecimal.
.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-set\-conf = \fIparm=val\fP [ \fI,parm=val\fP ]
Set radio configuration parameter(s),  e.g.
.IR stop_bits=2 .
.IP
Use the
.B -L
option of
.B rigctl
for a list of configuration parameters for a given model number.
.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-set\-separator = \fIsep\fP
Set character as column separator instead of the CSV comma.
.IP
Some common alternatives are the vertical bar (pipe), \(oq|\(cq, semicolon,
\(oq;\(cq, and colon, \(oq:\(cq.
.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
Bypass mem_caps, apply to all fields of channel_t.
.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-xml
Use XML format instead of CSV, if libxml2 is available.
.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Set verbose mode, cumulative (see
.B DIAGNOSTICS
below).
.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a summary of these options and exit.
.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version of
.B rigmem
and exit.
.
.PP
.BR Note :
Some options may not be implemented by a given backend and will return an
error.  This is most likely to occur with the
.B \-\-set\-conf
option.
.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.
Backup and restore are supported for basic CSV file and XML format where
available.
.
.PP
Please note that the backend for the radio to be controlled, or the radio
itself may not support some commands. In that case, the operation will fail
with a
.B Hamlib
error message.
.
.PP
Here is a summary of the supported commands:
.
.TP
.BI save " file"
Save all the content of memory in a CSV (or XML) file given as an argument to
the command.
.
.TP
.BI load " file"
Load the content into all the memory from a CSV (or XML) file given as an
argument to the command.
.
.TP
.BI save_parm " file"
Save all the parameters of the radio in a CSV (or XML) file given as an
argument to the command.
.
.TP
.BI load_parm " file"
Load the parameters of the radio from a CSV (or XML) file given as an argument
to the command.
.
.TP
.B clear
This is a very
.B DANGEROUS
command, as it will completely clear out everything you have programmed in the
memory of your radio.
.BR "ALL DATA WILL BE LOST" .
Use at your own risk!
.
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.
The
.BR \-v ,
.B \-\-verbose
option allows different levels of diagnostics to be output to
.B stderr
and correspond to \-v for
.BR BUG ,
\-vv for
.BR ERR ,
\-vvv for
.BR WARN ,
\-vvvv for
.BR VERBOSE ,
or \-vvvvv for
.BR TRACE .
.
.PP
A given verbose level is useful for providing needed debugging information to
the email address below.  For example, TRACE output shows all of the values
sent to and received from the radio which is very useful for radio backend
library development and may be requested by the developers.
.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.
.B rigmem
exits with:
.
.TP
.B 0
if all operations completed normally;
.
.TP
.B 1
if there was an invalid command line option or argument;
.
.TP
.B 2
if an error was returned by
.BR Hamlib .
.
.TP
.B 3
the
.B Hamlib
backend has no memory support implemented and/or the radio has no memory access
available.
.
.
.SH BUGS
.
Report bugs to:
.IP
.nf
.MT hamlib\-developer@lists.sourceforge.net
Hamlib Developer mailing list
.ME
.fi
.
.
.SH COPYING
.
This file is part of Hamlib, a project to develop a library that simplifies
radio, rotator, and amplifier control functions for developers of software
primarily of interest to radio amateurs and those interested in radio
communications.
.
.PP
Copyright \(co 2003-2011 Stephane Fillod
.br
Copyright \(co 2007,2019-2020 Nate Bargmann
.
.PP
This is free software; see the file COPYING for copying conditions.  There is
NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR rigctl (1),
.BR hamlib (7)
.
.
.SH COLOPHON
.
Links to the Hamlib Wiki, Git repository, release archives, and daily snapshot
archives are available via
.
.UR http://www.hamlib.org
hamlib.org
.UE .
