.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For layout and available macros, see man(7), man-pages(7), groff_man(7)
.\" Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Note: Please keep this page in sync with the source, rigswr.c
.\"
.TH RIGSWR "1" "2020-09-09" "Hamlib" "Hamlib Utilities"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
rigswr \- measure VSWR vs frequency.
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY rigswr
.OP \-hvV
.OP \-m id
.OP \-r device
.OP \-s baud
.OP \-c id
.OP \-C parm=val
.OP \-p device
.OP \-P type
start_freq
stop_freq
.RI [ freq_step ]
.SY
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
.B rigswr
uses
.B Hamlib
to control a radio to measure VSWR (Voltage Standing Wave Ratio) over a
frequency range.
.
.PP
It scans frequencies from
.I start_freq
to
.I stop_freq
with an optional increment of
.I freq_step
(default step is 100 kHz).  All values must be entered as an integer in Hertz
(cycles per second).
.
.PP
.BR Note :
.B rigswr
assumes that
.I start_freq
is less than or equal to
.IR stop_freq .
If it is greater,
.B rigswr
will exit without doing anything.
.
.PP
For each frequency, it transmits at 25% of total POWER during 0.5 second in CW
mode and reads VSWR.
.
.PP
Frequency and the corresponding VSWR are then printed on
.BR stdout .
.
.PP
To work correctly,
.B rigswr
needs a radio that can measure VSWR and a
.B Hamlib
backend that supports reading VSWR from the radio.
.PP
Keep in mind that Hamlib is BETA level software.  While a lot of backend
libraries lack complete radio support, the basic functions are usually well
supported.
.
.PP
Please report bugs and provide feedback at the e-mail address given in the
.B BUGS
section below.  Patches and code enhancements sent to the same address are
welcome.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax.  Short options that
take an argument may have the value follow immediately or be separated by a
space.  Long options starting with two dashes (\(oq\-\(cq) require an
\(oq=\(cq between the option and any argument.
.
.PP
Here is a summary of the supported options:
.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-model = \fIid\fP
Select radio model number.
.IP
See model list (use \(lqrigctl \-l\(rq).
.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rig\-file = \fIdevice\fP
Use
.I device
as the file name of the port connected to the radio.
.IP
Often a serial port, but could be a USB to serial adapter.  Typically
.IR /dev/ttyS0 ", " /dev/ttyS1 ", " /dev/ttyUSB0 ,
etc. on Linux,
.IR COM1 ", " COM2 ,
etc. on MS Windows.  The BSD flavors and Mac OS/X have their own designations.
See your system's documentation.
.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-serial\-speed = \fIbaud\fP
Set radio serial speed to
.I baud
rate.
.IP
Uses maximum serial speed from radio backend capabilities as the default.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-civaddr = \fIid\fP
Use
.I id
as the CI-V address to communicate with the radio.
.IP
Only useful for Icom and some Ten-Tec radios.
.IP
.BR Note :
The
.I id
is in decimal notation, unless prefixed by
.IR 0x ,
in which case it is hexadecimal.
.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-set\-conf = \fIparm=val\fP [ \fI,parm=val\fP ]
Set radio configuration parameter(s),  e.g.
.IR stop_bits=2 .
.IP
Use the
.B -L
option of
.B rigctl
for a list of configuration parameters for a given model number.
.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-ptt\-file = \fIdevice\fP
Use
.I device
as the file name of the Push-To-Talk port using a device file as with the
.B \-r
option above.
.IP
This is only needed if the radio doesn't have CAT PTT control and requires a
separate device port to key the transmitter.
.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-ptt\-type = \fItype\fP
Use
.I type
of Push-To-Talk device.
.IP
Supported types are RIG (CAT), DTR, RTS, PARALLEL, NONE.
.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Set verbose mode, cumulative (see
.B DIAGNOSTICS
below).
.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a summary of these options and exit.
.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version of
.B rigswr
and exit.
.
.PP
.BR Note :
Some options may not be implemented by a given backend and will return an
error.  This is most likely to occur with the
.B \-\-set\-conf
option.
.
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.
The
.BR \-v ,
.B \-\-verbose
option allows different levels of diagnostics to be output to
.B stderr
and correspond to \-v for
.BR BUG ,
\-vv for
.BR ERR ,
\-vvv for
.BR WARN ,
\-vvvv for
.BR VERBOSE ,
or \-vvvvv for
.BR TRACE .
.
.PP
A given verbose level is useful for providing needed debugging information to
the email address below.  For example, TRACE output shows all of the values
sent to and received from the radio which is very useful for radio backend
library development and may be requested by the developers.
.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.
.B rigswr
exits with:
.
.TP
.B 0
if all operations completed normally;
.
.TP
.B 1
if there was an invalid command line option or argument;
.
.TP
.B 2
if an error was returned by
.BR Hamlib ;
.
.TP
.B 3
if the rig doesn't have the required capabilities.
.
.
.SH EXAMPLE
.
Scans frequencies between 14.000 MHz and 14.200 MHz with 50 kHz step on a
TS-850 and records VSWR measurements in file
.I cswr
(typed text shown in bold):
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " rigswr -m 2009 -r /dev/ttyS1 14000000 14200000 50000 > cswr"
.EE
.in
.
.PP
After completion,
.I cswr
contains the following lines:
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
14000000 1.50
14050000 1.31
14100000 1.22
14150000 1.07
14200000 1.07
.EE
.in
.
.PP
The result can be plotted with
.BR gnuplot (1):
.
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
.RB $ " gnuplot"
.B set data style linespoints
.B set grid
.B plot cswr
.EE
.in
.
.
.SH BUGS
.
Depending on keyer/QSK setup, transmissions in CW mode may not be modulated
thus possibly giving a wrong result. Please report this situation if it
happens.
.
.PP
Report bugs to:
.IP
.nf
.MT hamlib\-developer@lists.sourceforge.net
Hamlib Developer mailing list
.ME
.
.
.SH COPYING
.
This file is part of Hamlib, a project to develop a library that simplifies
radio, rotator, and amplifier control functions for developers of software
primarily of interest to radio amateurs and those interested in radio
communications.
.
.PP
Copyright \(co 2004 Thierry Leconte
.br
Copyright \(co 2004-2011 Stephane Fillod
.br
Copyright \(co 2007,2018-2020 Nate Bargmann
.PP
This is free software; see the file COPYING for copying conditions.  There is
NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR gnuplot (1),
.BR rigctl (1),
.BR hamlib (7)
.
.
.SH COLOPHON
.
Links to the Hamlib Wiki, Git repository, release archives, and daily snapshot
archives are available via
.
.UR http://www.hamlib.org
hamlib.org
.UE .
