.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For layout and available macros, see man(7), man-pages(7), groff_man(7)
.\" Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Note: Please keep this page in sync with the source, rigtestlibusb.c
.\"
.TH RIGTESTLIBUSB "1" "2026-02-14" "Hamlib" "Hamlib Utilities"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
rigtestlibusb \- print summary of USB devices attached to the system.
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY rigtestlibusb
.OP \-v
.OP \-d device
.YS
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
Command line utility to print a summary USB devices attached to the system.
.
More detail is obtained by use of the
.B \-v
option.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
This program accepts the following options.
.
.TP
.B \-v
Print more detail about the USB devices.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
Unlike other
.B Hamlib
utilities, this option is not cumulative.
.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \fI/dev/bus/usb/...\fP
Print information on a specific USB device.
.
.IP
.BR Note :
On a current Debian 12 system this fails with:
.
.IP
.EX
$ rigtestlibusb -v -d /dev/bus/usb/002/009 
Testing wrapped devices is not supported on your platform
.EE
.
.
.SH BUGS
.
This woefully incomplete document.
.
.PP
Limited understanding of the intended use cases of this utility.
.
Perhaps more useful on systems that lack an
.BR lsusb (1)
utiltiy.
.
.
.SH COPYING
.
This file is part of Hamlib, a project to develop a library that simplifies
radio, rotator, and amplifier control functions for developers of software
primarily of interest to radio amateurs and those interested in radio
communications.
.
.PP
Copyright \(co 2000-2011 Stephane Fillod
.br
Copyright \(co 2000-2026 the Hamlib Group (various contributors)
.br
Copyright \(co 2010-2026 Nate Bargmann
.
.PP
This is free software; see the file COPYING for copying conditions.
.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR rigctl (1),
.BR hamlib (7) 
.
.
.SH COLOPHON
.
Links to the Hamlib Wiki, Git repository, release archives, and daily snapshot
archives are available via 
.
.UR http://www.hamlib.org
hamlib.org
.UE .
