.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For layout and available macros, see man(7), man-pages(7), groff_man(7)
.\" Please adjust the date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Note: Please keep this page in sync with the source, rigtestmcastrx.c
.\"
.TH RIGTESTMCASTRX "1" "2026-02-14" "Hamlib" "Hamlib Utilities"
.
.
.SH NAME
.
rigtestmcastrx \- skeleton test program receiving data from the multicast server
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.
.SY rigtestmcastrx
.YS
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.
Simple test program to test receiving data from the
.BR rigctltcp (1)
multicast server.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.
This program accepts no options.
.
.
.SH BUGS
.
This woefully incomplete document.
.
.PP
Various values are hard coded in the source.
.
.PP
This is likely only a skeleton to be used for further development.
.
.
.SH COPYING
.
This file is part of Hamlib, a project to develop a library that simplifies
radio, rotator, and amplifier control functions for developers of software
primarily of interest to radio amateurs and those interested in radio
communications.
.
.PP
Copyright \(co 2000-2011 Stephane Fillod
.br
Copyright \(co 2000-2026 the Hamlib Group (various contributors)
.br
Copyright \(co 2010-2026 Nate Bargmann
.
.PP
This is free software; see the file COPYING for copying conditions.
.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.
.BR rigctltcp (1),
.BR hamlib (7) 
.
.
.SH COLOPHON
.
Links to the Hamlib Wiki, Git repository, release archives, and daily snapshot
archives are available via 
.
.UR http://www.hamlib.org
hamlib.org
.UE .
